<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Ruins; Or, Meditation on the Revolutions of Empires</title><author>Volney, Constantin-François (1757-1820)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Joseph Johnson</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1791</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="13">
      CHAPTER XIII.
    

      WILL THE HUMAN RACE IMPROVE?
    

      At these words, oppressed with the painful sentiment with which their
      severity overwhelmed me: Woe to the nations! cried I, melting in tears;
      woe to myself! Ah! now it is that I despair of the happiness of man! Since
      his miseries proceed from his heart; since the remedy is in his own power,
      woe for ever to his existence! Who, indeed will ever be able to restrain
      the lust of wealth in the strong and powerful? Who can enlighten the
      ignorance of the weak? Who can teach the multitude to know their rights,
      and force their chiefs to perform their duties? Thus the race of man is
      always doomed to suffer! Thus the individual will not cease to oppress the
      individual, a nation to attack a nation; and days of prosperity, of glory,
      for these regions, shall never return. Alas! conquerors will come; they
      will drive out the oppressors, and fix themselves in their place; but,
      inheriting their power, they will inherit their rapacity; and the earth
      will have changed tyrants, without changing the tyranny.
    

      Then, turning to the Genius, I exclaimed:
    

      O Genius, despair hath settled on my soul. Knowing the nature of man, the
      perversity of those who govern, and the debasement of the governed—this
      knowledge hath disgusted me with life; and since there is no choice but to
      be the accomplice or the victim of oppression, what remains to the man of
      virtue but to mingle his ashes with those of the tomb?
    

      The Genius then gave me a look of severity, mingled with compassion; and
      after a few moments of silence, he replied:
    

      Virtue, then, consists in dying! The wicked man is indefatigable in
      consummating his crime, and the just is discouraged from doing good at the
      first obstacle he encounters! But such is the human heart. A little
      success intoxicates man with confidence; a reverse overturns and confounds
      him. Always given up to the sensation of the moment, he seldom judges
      things from their nature, but from the impulse of his passion.
    

      Mortal, who despairest of the human race, on what profound combination of
      facts hast thou established thy conclusion? Hast thou scrutinized the
      organization of sentient beings, to determine with precision whether the
      instinctive force which moves them on to happiness is essentially weaker
      than that which repels them from it? or, embracing in one glance the
      history of the species, and judging the future by the past, hast thou
      shown that all improvement is impossible? Say! hath human society, since
      its origin, made no progress toward knowledge and a better state? Are men
      still in their forests, destitute of everything, ignorant, stupid and
      ferocious? Are all the nations still in that age when nothing was seen
      upon the globe but brutal robbers and brutal slaves? If at any time, in
      any place, individuals have ameliorated, why shall not the whole mass
      ameliorate? If partial societies have made improvements, what shall hinder
      the improvement of society in general? And if the first obstacles are
      overcome, why should the others be insurmountable?
    

      Art thou disposed to think that the human race degenerates? Guard against
      the illusion and paradoxes of the misanthrope. Man, discontented with the
      present, imagines for the past a perfection which never existed, and which
      only serves to cover his chagrin. He praises the dead out of hatred to the
      living, and beats the children with the bones of their ancestors.
    

      To prove this pretended retrograde progress from perfection we must
      contradict the testimony of reason and of fact; and if the facts of
      history are in any measure uncertain, we must contradict the living fact
      of the organization of man; we must prove that he is born with the
      enlightened use of his senses; that, without experience, he can
      distinguish aliment from poison; that the child is wiser than the old man;
      that the blind walks with more safety than the clear-sighted; that the
      civilized man is more miserable than the savage; and, indeed, that there
      is no ascending scale in experience and instruction.
    

      Believe, young man, the testimony of monuments, and the voice of the
      tombs. Some countries have doubtless fallen from what they were at certain
      epochs; but if we weigh the wisdom and happiness of their inhabitants,
      even in those times, we shall find more of splendor than of reality in
      their glory; we shall find, in the most celebrated of ancient states,
      enormous vices and cruel abuses, the true causes of their decay; we shall
      find in general that the principles of government were atrocious; that
      insolent robberies, barbarous wars and implacable hatreds were raging from
      nation to nation;* that natural right was unknown; that morality was
      perverted by senseless fanaticism and deplorable superstition; that a
      dream, a vision, an oracle, were constantly the causes of vast commotions.
      Perhaps the nations are not yet entirely cured of all these evils; but
      their intensity at least is diminished, and the experience of the past has
      not been wholly lost. For the last three centuries, especially, knowledge
      has increased and been extended; civilization, favored by happy
      circumstances, has made a sensible progress; inconveniences and abuses
      have even turned to its advantage; for if states have been too much
      extended by conquest, the people, by uniting under the same yoke, have
      lost the spirit of estrangement and division which made them all enemies
      one to the other. If the powers of government have been more concentrated,
      there has been more system and harmony in their exercise. If wars have
      become more extensive in the mass, they are less bloody in detail. If men
      have gone to battle with less personality, less energy, their struggles
      have been less sanguinary and less ferocious; they have been less free,
      but less turbulent; more effeminate, but more pacific. Despotism itself
      has rendered them some service; for if governments have been more
      absolute, they have been more quiet and less tempestuous. If thrones have
      become a property and hereditary, they have excited less dissensions, and
      the people have suffered fewer convulsions; finally, if the despots,
      jealous and mysterious, have interdicted all knowledge of their
      administration, all concurrence in the management of public affairs, the
      passions of men, drawn aside from politics, have fixed upon the arts, and
      the sciences of nature; and the sphere of ideas in every direction has
      been enlarged; man, devoted to abstract studies, has better understood his
      place in the system of nature, and his relations in society; principles
      have been better discussed, final causes better explained, knowledge more
      extended, individuals better instructed, manners more social, and life
      more happy. The species at large, especially in certain countries, has
      gained considerably; and this amelioration cannot but increase in future,
      because its two principal obstacles, those even which, till then, had
      rendered it slow and sometimes retrograde,—the difficulty of
      transmitting ideas and of communicating them rapidly,—have been at
      last removed.
    

     * Read the history of the wars of Rome and Carthage, of
     Sparta and Messina, of Athens and Syracuse, of the Hebrews
     and the Phoenicians: yet these are the nations of which
     antiquity boasts as being most polished!


      Indeed, among the ancients, each canton, each city, being isolated from
      all others by the difference of its language, the consequence was
      favorable to ignorance and anarchy. There was no communication of ideas,
      no participation of discoveries, no harmony of interests or of wills, no
      unity of action or design; besides, the only means of transmitting and of
      propagating ideas being that of speech, fugitive and limited, and that of
      writing, tedious of execution, expensive and scarce, the consequence was a
      hindrance of present instruction, loss of experience from one generation
      to another, instability, retrogression of knowledge, and a perpetuity of
      confusion and childhood.
    

      But in the modern world, especially in Europe, great nations having allied
      themselves in language, and established vast communities of opinions, the
      minds of men are assimilated, and their affections extended; there is a
      sympathy of opinion and a unity of action; then that gift of heavenly
      Genius, the holy art of printing, having furnished the means of
      communicating in an instant the same idea to millions of men, and of
      fixing it in a durable manner, beyond the power of tyrants to arrest or
      annihilate, there arose a mass of progressive instruction, an expanding
      atmosphere of science, which assures to future ages a solid amelioration.
      This amelioration is a necessary effect of the laws of nature; for, by the
      law of sensibility, man as invincibly tends to render himself happy as the
      flame to mount, the stone to descend, or the water to find its level. His
      obstacle is his ignorance, which misleads him in the means, and deceives
      him in causes and effects. He will enlighten himself by experience; he
      will become right by dint of errors; he will grow wise and good because it
      is his interest so to be. Ideas being communicated through the nation,
      whole classes will gain instruction; science will become a vulgar
      possession, and all men will know what are the principles of individual
      happiness and of public prosperity. They will know the relations they bear
      to society, their duties and their rights; they will learn to guard
      against the illusions of the lust of gain; they will perceive that the
      science of morals is a physical science, composed, indeed, of elements
      complicated in their operation, but simple and invariable in their nature,
      since they are only the elements of the organization of man. They will see
      the propriety of being moderate and just, because in that is found the
      advantage and security of each; they will perceive that the wish to enjoy
      at the expense of another is a false calculation of ignorance, because it
      gives rise to reprisal, hatred, and vengeance, and that dishonesty is the
      never-failing offspring of folly.
    

      Individuals will feel that private happiness is allied to public good:
    

      The weak, that instead of dividing their interests, they ought to unite
      them, because equality constitutes their force:
    

      The rich, that the measure of enjoyment is bounded by the constitution of
      the organs, and that lassitude follows satiety:
    

      The poor, that the employment of time, and the peace of the heart, compose
      the highest happiness of man. And public opinion, reaching kings on their
      thrones, will force them to confine themselves to the limits of regular
      authority.
    

      Even chance itself, serving the cause of nations, will sometimes give them
      feeble chiefs, who, through weakness, will suffer them to become free; and
      sometimes enlightened chiefs, who, from a principle of virtue, will free
      them.
    

      And when nations, free and enlightened, shall become like great
      individuals, the whole species will have the same facilities as particular
      portions now have; the communication of knowledge will extend from one to
      another, and thus reach the whole. By the law of imitation, the example of
      one people will be followed by others, who will adopt its spirit and its
      laws. Even despots, perceiving that they can no longer maintain their
      authority without justice and beneficence, will soften their sway from
      necessity, from rivalship; and civilization will become universal.
    

      There will be established among the several nations an equilibrium of
      force, which, restraining them all within the bounds of the respect due to
      their reciprocal rights, shall put an end to the barbarous practice of
      war, and submit their disputes to civil arbitration.* The human race will
      become one great society, one individual family, governed by the same
      spirit, by common laws, and enjoying all the happiness of which their
      nature is susceptible.
    

     * What is a people?  An individual of the society at large.
     What a war?  A duel between two individual people.  In what
     manner ought a society to act when two of its members fight?
     Interfere and reconcile, or repress them.  In the days of
     the Abbe de Saint Pierre this was treated as a dream, but
     happily for the human race it begins to be realized.


      Doubtless this great work will be long accomplishing; because the same
      movement must be given to an immense body; the same leaven must assimilate
      an enormous mass of heterogeneous parts. But this movement shall be
      effected; its presages are already to be seen. Already the great society,
      assuming in its course the same characters as partial societies have done,
      is evidently tending to a like result. At first disconnected in all its
      parts, it saw its members for a long time without cohesion; and this
      general solitude of nations formed its first age of anarchy and childhood;
      divided afterwards by chance into irregular sections, called states and
      kingdoms, it has experienced the fatal effects of an extreme inequality of
      wealth and rank; and the aristocracy of great empires has formed its
      second age; then, these lordly states disputing for preeminence, have
      exhibited the period of the shock of factions.
    

      At present the contending parties, wearied with discord, feel the want of
      laws, and sigh for the age of order and of peace. Let but a virtuous chief
      arise! a just, a powerful people appear! and the earth will raise them to
      supreme power. The world is waiting for a legislative people; it wishes
      and demands it; and my heart attends the cry.
    

      Then turning towards the west: Yes, continued he, a hollow sound already
      strikes my ear; a cry of liberty, proceeding from far distant shores,
      resounds on the ancient continent. At this cry, a secret murmur against
      oppression is raised in a powerful nation; a salutary inquietude alarms
      her respecting her situation; she enquires what she is, and what she ought
      to be; while, surprised at her own weakness, she interrogates her rights,
      her resources, and what has been the conduct of her chiefs.
    

      Yet another day—a little more reflection—and an immense
      agitation will begin; a new-born age will open! an age of astonishment to
      vulgar minds, of terror to tyrants, of freedom to a great nation, and of
      hope to the human race!
    


 



</div></body></text></TEI>