<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Ruins; Or, Meditation on the Revolutions of Empires</title><author>Volney, Constantin-François (1757-1820)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Joseph Johnson</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1791</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="4">
      CHAPTER IV.
    

      THE EXPOSITION
    

      Thus spoke the Phantom. Confused with this discourse, and my heart
      agitated with different reflections, I remained long in silence. At
      length, taking courage, I thus addressed him: Oh, Genius of tombs and
      ruins! Thy presence, thy severity, hath disordered my senses; but the
      justice of thy discourse restoreth confidence to my soul. Pardon my
      ignorance. Alas, if man is blind, shall his misfortune be also his crime?
      I may have mistaken the voice of reason; but never, knowingly, have I
      rejected its authority. Ah! if thou readest my heart, thou knowest with
      what enthusiasm it seeketh truth. Is it not in its pursuit that thou seest
      me in this sequestered spot? Alas! I have wandered over the earth, I have
      visited cities and countries; and seeing everywhere misery and desolation,
      a sense of the evils which afflict my fellow men hath deeply oppressed my
      soul. I have said, with a sigh: is man then born but for sorrow and
      anguish? And I have meditated upon human misery that I might discover a
      remedy. I have said, I will separate myself from the corruption of
      society; I will retire far from palaces where the mind is depraved by
      satiety and from the hovel where it is debased by misery. I will go into
      the desert and dwell among ruins; I will interrogate ancient monuments on
      the wisdom of past ages; I will invoke from the bosom of the tombs the
      spirit which once in Asia gave splendor to states, and glory to nations; I
      will ask of the ashes of legislators, by what secret causes do empires
      rise and fall; from what sources spring the Prosperity and misfortunes of
      nations, on what principles can the Peace of Society, and the happiness of
      man be established?
    

      I ceased, and with submissive look awaited the answer of the Genius.
    

      Peace and happiness, said he, attend those who practice justice! Since thy
      heart, O mortal, with sincerity seeketh truth; since thine eyes can still
      recognize her through the mist of prejudice, thy prayer shall not be in
      vain. I will unfold to thy view that truth thou invokest; I will teach thy
      reason that knowledge thou seekest; I will reveal to thee the science of
      ages and the wisdom of the tombs.
    

      Then approaching and laying his hand on my head, he said:
    

      Rise, mortal, and extricate thy senses from the dust in which thou movest.
    

      Suddenly a celestial flame seemed to dissolve the bands which held us to
      the earth; and, like a light vapor, borne on the wings of the Genius, I
      felt myself wafted to the regions above. Thence, from the aerial heights,
      looking down upon the earth, I perceived a scene altogether new. Under my
      feet, floating in the void, a globe like that of the moon, but smaller and
      less luminous, presented to me one of its phases; and that phase* had the
      aspect of a disk varigated with large spots, some white and nebulous,
      others brown, green or gray, and while I strained my sight to distinguish
      what they were, the Genius exclaimed:
    

     * See Plate representing half the terrestrial globe,
     opposite page 10.


      Disciple of Truth, knowest thou that object?
    

      O Genius, answered I, if I did not see the moon in another quarter of the
      heavens, I should have supposed that to be her globe. It has the
      appearance of that planet seen through the telescope during the
      obscuration of an eclipse. These varigated spots might be mistaken for
      seas and continents.
    

      They are seas and continents, said he, and those of the very hemisphere
      which you inhabit.
    

      What! said I, is that the earth—the habitation of man?
    

      Yes, replied he, that brown space which occupies irregularly a great
      portion of the disk, and envelops it almost on every side, is what you
      call the great ocean, which advancing from the south pole towards the
      equator, forms first the great gulf of India and Africa, then extends
      eastward across the Malay islands to the confines of Tartary, while
      towards the west it encircles the continents of Africa and of Europe, even
      to the north of Asia.
    

      That square peninsula under our feet is the arid country of the Arabs; the
      great continent on its left, almost as naked in its interior, with a
      little verdure only towards its borders, is the parched soil inhabited by
      black-men.* To the north, beyond a long, narrow and irregular sea,** are
      the countries of Europe, rich in meadows and cultivated fields. On its
      right, from the Caspian Sea, extend the snowy and naked plains of Tartary.
      Returning in this direction that white space is the vast and barren desert
      of Cobi, which separates China from the rest of the world. You see that
      empire in the furrowed plain which obliquely rounds itself off from our
      sight. On yonder coasts, those ragged tongues of land and scattered points
      are the peninsulas and islands of the Malays, the wretched possessors of
      the spices and perfumes. That triangle which advances so far into the sea,
      is the too famous peninsula of India.*** You see the winding course of the
      Ganges, the rough mountains of Thibet, the lovely valley of Cachemere, the
      briny deserts of Persia, the banks of the Euphrates and Tygris, the deep
      bed of the Jordan and the canals of the solitary Nile.
    

     * Africa.

     ** The Mediterranean.

     *** Of what real good has been the commerce of India to the
     mass of the people?  On the contrary, how great the evil
     occasioned by the superstition of this country having been
     added the general superstition!


      O Genius, said I, interrupting him, the sight of a mortal reaches not to
      objects at such a distance. He touched my eyes, and immediately they
      became piercing as those of an eagle; nevertheless the rivers still
      appeared like waving lines, the mountains winding furrows, and the cities
      little compartments like the squares of a chess-board.
    

      And the Genius proceeded to enumerate and point out the objects to me:
      Those piles of ruins, said he, which you see in that narrow valley watered
      by the Nile, are the remains of opulent cities, the pride of the ancient
      kingdom of Ethiopia.* Behold the wrecks of her metropolis, of Thebes with
      her hundred palaces,** the parent of cities, and monument of the caprice
      of destiny. There a people, now forgotten, discovered, while others were
      yet barbarians, the elements of the arts and sciences. A race of men now
      rejected from society for their sable skin and frizzled hair, founded on
      the study of the laws of nature, those civil and religious systems which
      still govern the universe. Lower down, those dusky points are the pyramids
      whose masses have astonished you. Beyond that, the coast, hemmed in
      between the sea and a narrow ridge of mountains, was the habitation of the
      Phoenicians. These were the famous cities of Tyre, of Sidon, of Ascalon,
      of Gaza, and of Berytus. That thread of water with no outlet, is the river
      Jordan; and those naked rocks were once the theatre of events that have
      resounded throughout the world. Behold that desert of Horeb, and that
      Mount Sinai; where, by means beyond vulgar reach, a genius, profound and
      bold, established institutions which have weighed on the whole human race.
      On that dry shore which borders it, you perceive no longer any trace of
      splendor; yet there was an emporium of riches. There were those famous
      Ports of Idumea, whence the fleets of Phoenicia and Judea, coasting the
      Arabian peninsula, went into the Persian gulf, to seek there the pearls of
      Hevila, the gold of Saba and of Ophir. Yes, there on that coast of Oman
      and of Barhain was the seat of that commerce of luxuries, which, by its
      movements and revolutions, fixed the destinies of ancient nations.***
      Thither came the spices and precious stones of Ceylon, the shawls of
      Cassimere, the diamonds of Golconda, the amber of Maldivia, the musk of
      Thibet, the aloes of Cochin, the apes and peacocks of the continent of
      India, the incense of Hadramaut, the myrrh, the silver, the gold dust and
      ivory of Africa; thence passing, sometimes by the Red Sea on the vessels
      of Egypt and Syria, these luxuries nourished successively the wealth of
      Thebes, of Sidon, of Memphis and of Jerusalem; sometimes, ascending the
      Tygris and Euphrates, they awakened the activity of the Assyrians, Medes,
      Chaldeans, and Persians; and that wealth, according to the use or abuse of
      it, raised or reversed by turns their domination. Hence sprung the
      magnificence of Persepolis, whose columns you still perceive; of Ecbatana,
      whose sevenfold wall is destroyed; of Babylon,**** now leveled with the
      earth; of Nineveh, of which scarce the name remains; of Thapsacus, of
      Anatho, of Gerra, and of desolated Palmyra. O names for ever glorious!
      fields of renown! countries of never-dying memory! what sublime lessons
      doth your aspect offer! what profound truths are written on the surface of
      your soil! remembrances of times past, return into my mind! places,
      witnesses of the life of man in so many different ages, retrace for me the
      revolutions of his fortune! say, what were their springs and secret
      causes! say, from what sources he derived success and disgrace! unveil to
      himself the causes of his evils! correct him by the spectacle of his
      errors! teach him the wisdom which belongeth to him, and let the
      experience of past ages become a means of instruction, and a germ of
      happiness to present and future generations.
    

     * In the new Encyclopedia 3rd vol. Antiquities is published
     a memoir, respecting the chronology of the twelve ages
     anterior to the passing of Xerxes into Greece, in which I
     conceive myself to have proved that upper Egypt formerly
     composed a distinct kingdom known to the Hebrews by the name
     of Kous and to which the appellation of Ethiopia was
     specially given.  This kingdom preserved its independence to
     the time of Psammeticus; at which period, being united to
     the Lower Egypt, it lost its name of Ethiopia, which
     thenceforth was bestowed upon the nations of Nubia and upon
     the different tribes of blacks, including Thebes, their
     metropolis.

     ** The idea of a city with a hundred gates, in the common
     acceptation of the word, is so absurd, that I am astonished
     the equivoque has not before been felt.

     It has ever been the custom of the East to call palaces and
     houses of the great by the name of gates, because the
     principal luxury of these buildings consists in the singular
     gate leading from the street into the court, at the farthest
     extremity of which the palace is situated.  It is under the
     vestibule of this gate that conversation is held with
     passengers, and a sort of audience and hospitality given.
     All this was doubtless known to Homer; but poets make no
     commentaries, and readers love the marvellous.

     This city of Thebes, now Lougsor, reduced to the condition
     of a miserable village, has left astonishing monuments of
     its magnificence.  Particulars of this may be seen in the
     plates of Norden, in Pocock, and in the recent travels of
     Bruce.  These monuments give credibility to all that Homer
     has related of its splendor, and lead us to infer its
     political power and external commerce.

     Its geographical position was favorable to this twofold
     object. For, on one side, the valley of the Nile, singularly
     fertile, must have early occasioned a numerous population;
     and, on the other, the Red Sea, giving communication with
     Arabia and India, and the Nile with Abyssinia and the
     Mediterranean, Thebes was thus naturally allied to the
     richest countries on the globe; an alliance that procured it
     an activity so much the greater, as Lower Egypt, at first a
     swamp, was nearly, if not totally, uninhabited.  But when at
     length this country had been drained by the canals and dikes
     which Sesostris constructed, population was introduced
     there, and wars arose which proved fatal to the power of
     Thebes.  Commerce then took another route, and descended to
     the point of the Red Sea, to the canals of Sesostris (see
     Strabo), and wealth and activity were transferred to
     Memphis.  This is manifestly what Diodorus means when he
     tells us (lib. i. sect. 2), that as soon as Memphis was
     established and made a wholesome and delicious abode, kings
     abandoned Thebes to fix themselves there.  Thus Thebes
     continued to decline, and Memphis to flourish, till the time
     of Alexander, who, building Alexandria on the border of the
     sea, caused Memphis to fall in its turn; so that prosperity
     and power seem to have descended historically step by step
     along the Nile; whence it results, both physically and
     historically, that the existence of Thebes was prior to that
     of the other cities.  The testimony of writers is very
     positive in this respect.  "The Thebans," says Diodorus,
     "consider themselves as the most ancient people of the
     earth, and assert, that with them originated philosophy and
     the science of the stars.  Their situation, it is true, is
     infinitely favorable to astronomical observation, and they
     have a more accurate division of time into mouths and years
     than other nations" etc.

     What Diodorus says of the Thebans, every author, and himself
     elsewhere, repeat of the Ethiopians, which tends more firmly
     to establish the identity of this place of which I have
     spoken.  "The Ethiopians conceive themselves," says he, lib.
     iii., "to be of greater antiquity than any other nation: and
     it is probable that, born under the sun's path, its warmth
     may have ripened them earlier than other men.  They suppose
     themselves also to be the inventors of divine worship, of
     festivals, of solemn assemblies, of sacrifices, and every
     other religious practice.  They affirm that the Egyptians
     are one of their colonies, and that the Delta, which was
     formerly sea, became land by the conglomeration of the earth
     of the higher country which was washed down by the Nile.
     They have, like the Egyptians, two species of letters,
     hieroglyphics, and the alphabet; but among the Egyptians the
     first was known only to the priests, and by them transmitted
     from father to son, whereas both species were common among
     the Ethiopians."

     "The Ethiopians," says Lucian, page 985, "were the first who
     invented the science of the stars, and gave names to the
     planets, not at random and without meaning, but descriptive
     of the qualities which they conceived them to possess; and
     it was from them that this art passed, still in an imperfect
     state, to the Egyptians."

     It would be easy to multiply citations upon this subject;
     from all which it follows, that we have the strongest
     reasons to believe that the country neighboring to the
     tropic was the cradle of the sciences, and of consequence
     that the first learned nation was a nation of Blacks; for it
     is incontrovertible, that, by the term Ethiopians, the
     ancients meant to represent a people of black complexion,
     thick lips, and woolly hair.  I am therefore inclined to
     believe, that the inhabitants of Lower Egypt were originally
     a foreign colony imported from Syria and Arabia, a medley of
     different tribes of savages, originally shepherds and
     fishermen, who, by degrees formed themselves into a nation,
     and who, by nature and descent, were enemies of the Thebans,
     by whom they were no doubt despised and treated as
     barbarians.

     I have suggested the same ideas in my Travels into Syria,
     founded upon the black complexion of the Sphinx.  I have
     since ascertained that the antique images of Thebias have
     the same characteristic; and Mr. Bruce has offered a
     multitude of analogous facts; but this traveller, of whom I
     heard some mention at Cairo, has so interwoven these facts
     with certain systematic opinions, that we should have
     recourse to his narratives with caution.

     It is singular that Africa, situated so near us, should be
     the least known country on the earth.  The English are at
     this moment making explorations, the success of which ought
     to excite our emulation.

     *** Ailah (Eloth), and Atsiom-Gaber (Hesien-Geber.)  The
     name of the first of these towns still subsists in its
     ruins, at the point of the gulf of the Red Sea, and in the
     route which the pilgrims take to Mecca.  Hesion has at
     present no trace, any more than Quolzoum and Faran: it was,
     however, the harbor for the fleets of Solomon.  The vessels
     of this prince conducted by the Tyrians, sailed along the
     coast of Arabia to Ophir, in the Persian Gulf, thus opening
     a communication with the merchants of India and Ceylon.
     That this navigation was entirely of Tyrian invention,
     appears both from the pilots and shipbuilders employed by
     the Jews, and the names that were given to the trading
     islands, viz. Tyrus and Aradus, now Barhain.  The voyage was
     performed in two different modes, either in canoes of osier
     and rushes, covered on the outside with skins done over with
     pitch: (these vessels were unable to quit the Red Sea, or so
     much as to leave the shore.)  The second mode of carrying on
     the trade was by means of vessels with decks of the size of
     our river boats, which were able to pass the strait and to
     weather the dangers of time ocean; but for this purpose it
     was necessary to bring the wood from Mount Libanus and
     Cilicia, where it is very fine and in great abundance.  This
     wood was first conveyed in floats from Tarsus to Phoenicia,
     for which reason the vessels were called ships of Tarsus;
     from whence it has been ridiculously inferred, that they
     went round the promontory of Africa as far as Tortosa in
     Spain.  From Phoenicia it was transported on the backs of
     camels to the Red Sea, which practice still continues,
     because the shores of this sea are absolutely unprovided
     with wood even for fuel.  These vessels spent a complete
     year in their voyage, that is, sailed one year, sojourned
     another, and did not return till the third.  This
     tediousness was owing first to their cruising from port to
     port, as they do at present; secondly, to their being
     detained by the Monsoon currents; and thirdly, because,
     according to the calculations of Pliny and Strabo, it was
     the ordinary practice among the ancients to spend three
     years in a voyage of twelve hundred leagues.  Such a
     commerce must have been very expensive, particularly as they
     were obliged to carry with them their provisions, and even
     fresh water.  For this reason Solomon made himself master of
     Palmyra, which was at that time inhabited, and was already
     the magazine and high road of merchants by the way of the
     Euphrates.  This conquest brought Solomon much nearer to the
     country of gold and pearls.  This alternative of a route
     either by the Red Sea or by the river Euphrates was to the
     ancients, what in later times has been the alternative in a
     voyage to the Indies, either by crossing the isthmus of Suez
     or doubling the cape of Good Hope.  It appears that till the
     time of Moses, this trade was carried on across the desert
     of Syria and Thebais; that afterwards it fell into the hands
     of the Phoenicians, who fixed its site upon the Red Sea; and
     that it was mutual jealousy that induced the kings of
     Nineveh and Babylon to undertake the destruction of Tyre and
     Jerusalem.  I insist the more upon these facts, because I
     have never seen any thing reasonable upon the subject.

     **** It appears that Babylon occupied on the eastern banks
     of the Euphrates a space of ground six leagues in length.
     Throughout this space bricks are found by means of which
     daily additions are made to the town of Helle.  Upon many of
     these are characters written with a nail similar to those of
     Persepolis.  I am indebted for these facts to M. de
     Beauchamp, grand vicar of Babylon, a traveller equally
     distinguished for his knowledge of astronomy and for his
     veracity.



 



</div></body></text></TEI>