<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Ruins; Or, Meditation on the Revolutions of Empires</title><author>Volney, Constantin-François (1757-1820)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Joseph Johnson</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1791</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="23">
      CHAPTER XXIII.
    

      ALL RELIGIONS HAVE THE SAME OBJECT.
    

      Thus spoke the orator in the name of those men who had studied the origin
      and succession of religious ideas.
    

      The theologians of various systems, reasoning on this discourse: "It is an
      impious representation," said some, "whose tendency is nothing less than
      to overturn all belief, to destroy subordination in the minds of men, and
      annihilate our ministry and power." "It is a romance," said others, "a
      tissue of conjectures, composed with art, but without foundation." The
      moderate and prudent men added: "Supposing all this to be true, why reveal
      these mysteries? Doubtless our opinions are full of errors; but these
      errors are a necessary restraint on the multitude. The world has gone thus
      for two thousand years; why change it now?"
    

      A murmur of disapprobation, which never fails to rise at every innovation,
      now began to increase; when a numerous group of the common classes of
      people, and of untaught men of all countries and of every nation, without
      prophets, without doctors, and without doctrine, advancing in the circle,
      drew the attention of the whole assembly; and one of them, in the name of
      all, thus addressed the multitude:
    

      "Mediators and arbiters of nations! the strange relations which have
      occupied the present debate were unknown to us until this day. Our
      understanding, confounded and amazed at so many statements, some of them
      learned, others absurd and all incomprehensible, remains in uncertainty
      and doubt. One only reflection has struck us: on reviewing so many
      prodigious facts, so many contradictory assertions, we ask ourselves: What
      are all these discussions to us? What need have we of knowing what passed
      five or six thousand years ago, in countries we never heard of, and among
      men who will ever be unknown to us? True or false, what interest have we
      in knowing whether the world has existed six thousand, or twenty-five
      thousand years? Whether it was made of nothing, or of something; by
      itself, or by a maker, who in his turn would require another maker? What!
      we are not sure of what happens near us, and shall we answer for what
      happens in the sun, in the moon, or in imaginary regions of space? We have
      forgotten our own infancy, and shall we know the infancy of the world? And
      who will attest what no one has seen? who will certify what no man
      comprehends?
    

      "Besides, what addition or diminution will it make to our existence, to
      answer yes or no to all these chimeras? Hitherto neither our fathers nor
      ourselves have had the least knowledge or notion of them, and we do not
      perceive that we have had on this account either more or less of the sun,
      more or less of subsistence, more or less of good or of evil.
    

      "If the knowledge of these things is so necessary, why have we lived as
      well without it as those who have taken so much trouble concerning it? If
      this knowledge is superfluous, why should we burden ourselves with it
      to-day?"
    

      Then addressing himself to the doctors and theologians:
    

      "What!" said he, "is it necessary that we, poor and ignorant men, whose
      every moment is scarcely sufficient for the cares of life, and the labors
      of which you take the profit,—is it necessary for us to learn the
      numberless histories that you have recounted, to read the quantity of
      books that you have cited, and to study the various languages in which
      they are composed! A thousand years of life would not suffice—"
    

      "It is not necessary," replied the doctors, "that you should acquire all
      this science; we have it for you—"
    

      "But even you," replied the simple men, "with all your science, you are
      not agreed; of what advantage, then, is your science? Besides, how can you
      answer for us? If the faith of one man is applicable to many, what need
      have even you to believe? your fathers may have believed for you; and this
      would be reasonable, since they have seen for you.
    

      "Farther, what is believing, if believing influences no action? And what
      action is influenced by believing, for instance, that the world is or is
      not eternal?"
    

      "The latter would be offensive to God," said the doctors.
    

      "How prove you that?" replied the simple men.
    

      "In our books," answered the doctors.
    

      "We do not understand them," returned the simple men.
    

      "We understand them for you," said the doctors.
    

      "That is the difficulty," replied the simple men. "By what right do you
      constitute yourselves mediators between God and us?"
    

      "By his orders," said the doctors.
    

      "Where is the proof of these orders?" said the simple men.
    

      "In our books," said the doctors.
    

      "We understand them not," said the simple men; "and how came this just God
      to give you this privilege over us? Why did this common father oblige us
      to believe on a less degree of evidence than you? He has spoken to you; be
      it so; he is infallible, and deceives you not. But it is you who speak to
      us! And who shall assure us that you are not in error yourselves, or that
      you will not lead us into error? And if we should be deceived, how will
      that just God save us contrary to law, or condemn us on a law which we
      have not known?"
    

      "He has given you the natural law," said the doctors.
    

      "And what is the natural law?" replied the simple men. "If that law is
      sufficient, why has he given any other? If it is not sufficient, why did
      he make it imperfect?"
    

      "His judgments are mysteries," said the doctors, "and his justice is not
      like that of men."
    

      "If his justice," replied the simple men, "is not like ours, by what rule
      are we to judge of it? And, moreover, why all these laws, and what is the
      object proposed by them?"
    

      "To render you more happy," replied a doctor, "by rendering you better and
      more virtuous. It is to teach man to enjoy his benefits, and not injure
      his fellows, that God has manifested himself by so many oracles and
      prodigies."
    

      "In that case," said the simple men, "there is no necessity for so many
      studies, nor of such a variety of arguments; only tell us which is the
      religion that best answers the end which they all propose."
    

      Immediately, on this, every group, extolling its own morality above that
      of all others, there arose among the different sects a new and most
      violent dispute.
    

      "It is we," said the Mussulmans, "who possess the most excellent morals,
      who teach all the virtues useful to men and agreeable to God. We profess
      justice, disinterestedness, resignation to providence, charity to our
      brethren, alms-giving, and devotion; we torment not the soul with
      superstitious fears; we live without alarm, and die without remorse."
    

      "How dare you speak of morals," answered the Christian priests, "you,
      whose chief lived in licentiousness and preached impurity? You, whose
      first precept is homicide and war? For this we appeal to experience: for
      these twelve hundred years your fanatical zeal has not ceased to spread
      commotion and carnage among the nations. If Asia, so flourishing in former
      times, is now languishing in barbarity and depopulation, it is in your
      doctrine that we find the cause; in that doctrine, the enemy of all
      instruction, which sanctifies ignorance, which consecrates the most
      absolute despotism in the governors, imposes the most blind and passive
      obedience in the people, that has stupefied the faculties of man, and
      brutalized the nations.
    

      "It is not so with our sublime and celestial morals; it was they which
      raised the world from its primitive barbarity, from the senseless and
      cruel superstitions of idolatry, from human sacrifices,* from the shameful
      orgies of pagan mysteries; they it was that purified manners, proscribed
      incest and adultery, polished savage nations, banished slavery, and
      introduced new and unknown virtues, charity for men, their equality in the
      sight of God, forgiveness and forgetfulness of injuries, the restraint of
      all the passions, the contempt of worldly greatness, a life completely
      spiritual and completely holy!"
    

     * Read the cold declaration of Eusebius (Proep. Evang. lib.
     I, p. 11,), who pretends that, since the coming of Christ,
     there have been neither wars, nor tyrants, nor cannibals,
     nor sodomites, nor persons committing incest, nor savages
     destroying their parents, etc.  When we read these fathers
     of the church we are astonished at their insincerity or
     infatuation.


      "We admire," said the Mussulmans, "the ease with which you reconcile that
      evangelical meekness, of which you are so ostentatious, with the injuries
      and outrages with which you are constantly galling your neighbors. When
      you criminate so severely the great man whom we revere, we might fairly
      retort on the conduct of him whom you adore; but we scorn such advantages,
      and confining ourselves to the real object in question, we maintain that
      the morals of your gospel have by no means that perfection which you
      ascribe to them; it is not true that they have introduced into the world
      new and unknown virtues: for example, the equality of men in the sight of
      God,—that fraternity and that benevolence which follow from it, were
      formal doctrines of the sect of the Hermatics or Samaneans,* from whom you
      descend. As to the forgiveness of injuries, the Pagans themselves had
      taught it; but in the extent that you give it, far from being a virtue, it
      becomes an immorality, a vice. Your so much boasted precept of turning one
      cheek after the other, is not only contrary to every sentiment of man, but
      is opposed to all ideas of justice. It emboldens the wicked by impunity,
      debases the virtuous by servility, delivers up the world to despotism and
      tyranny, and dissolves all society. Such is the true spirit of your
      doctrines. Your gospels in their precepts and their parables, never
      represent God but as a despot without any rules of equity; a partial
      father treating a debauched and prodigal son with more favor than his
      respectful and virtuous children; a capricious master, who gives the same
      wages to workmen who had wrought but one hour, as to those who had labored
      through the whole day; one who prefers the last comers to the first. The
      moral is everywhere misanthropic and antisocial; it disgusts men with life
      and with society; and tends only to encourage hermitism and celibacy.
    

     * The equality of mankind in a state of nature and in the
     eyes of God was one of the principal tenets of the
     Samaneans, and they appear to be the only ancients that
     entertained this opinion.


      "As to the manner in which you have practised these morals, we appeal in
      our turn to the testimony of facts. We ask whether it is this evangelical
      meekness which has excited your interminable wars between your sects, your
      atrocious persecutions of pretended heretics, your crusades against
      Arianism, Manicheism, Protestantism, without speaking of your crusades
      against us, and of those sacrilegious associations, still subsisting, of
      men who take an oath to continue them?* We ask you whether it be gospel
      charity which has made you exterminate whole nations in America, to
      annihilate the empires of Mexico and Peru; which makes you continue to
      dispeople Africa and sell its inhabitants like cattle, notwithstanding
      your abolition of slavery; which makes you ravage India and usurp its
      dominions; and whether it be the same charity which, for three centuries
      past, has led you to harrass the habitations of the people of three
      continents, of whom the most prudent, the Chinese and Japanese, were
      constrained to drive you off, that they might escape your chains and
      recover their internal peace?"
    

     * The oath taken by the knights of the Order of Malta, is to
     kill, or make the Mahometans prisoners, for the glory of
     God.


      Here the Bramins, the Rabbins, the Bonzes, the Chamans, the Priests of the
      Molucca islands, and the coasts of Guinea, loading the Christian doctors
      with reproaches: "Yes!" cried they, "these men are robbers and hypocrites,
      who preach simplicity, to surprise confidence; humility, to enslave with
      more ease; poverty, to appropriate all riches to themselves. They promise
      another world, the better to usurp the present; and while they speak to
      you of tolerance and charity, they burn, in the name of God, the men who
      do not worship him in their manner."
    

      "Lying priests," retorted the missionaries, "it is you who abuse the
      credulity of ignorant nations to subjugate them. It is you who have made
      of your ministry an art of cheating and imposture; you have converted
      religion into a traffic of cupidity and avarice. You pretend to hold
      communications with spirits, and they give for oracles nothing but your
      wills. You feign to read the stars, and destiny decrees only your desires.
      You cause idols to speak, and the gods are but the instruments of your
      passions. You have invented sacrifices and libations, to collect for your
      own profit the milk of flocks, and the flesh and fat of victims; and under
      the cloak of piety you devour the offerings of the gods, who cannot eat,
      and the substance of the people who are forced to labor."
    

      "And you," replied the Bramins, the Bonzes, the Chamans, "you sell to the
      credulous living, your vain prayers for the souls of the dead. With your
      indulgences and your absolutions you have usurped the power of God
      himself; and making a traffic of his favors and pardons, you have put
      heaven at auction; and by your system of expiations you have formed a
      tariff of crimes, which has perverted all consciences."*
    

     * As long as it shall be possible to obtain purification
     from crimes and exemption from punishment by means of money
     or other frivolous practices; as long as kings and great men
     shall suppose that building temples or instituting
     foundations, will absolve them from the guilt of oppression
     and homicide; as long as individuals shall imagine that they
     may rob and cheat, provided they observe fast during Lent,
     go to confession, and receive extreme unction, it is
     impossible there should exist in society any morality or
     virtue; and it is from a deep conviction of truth, that a
     modern philosopher has called the doctrine of expiations la
     verola des societes.


      "Add to this," said the Imans, "that these men have invented the most
      insidious of all systems of wickedness,—the absurd and impious
      obligation of recounting to them the most intimate secrets of actions and
      of thoughts (confessions); so their insolent curiosity has carried their
      inquisition even into the sanctuary of the marriage bed,* and the
      inviolable recesses of the heart."
    

     * Confession is a very ancient invention of the priests, who
     did not fail to avail themselves of that means of governing.
     It was practised in the Egyptian, Greek, Phrygian, Persian
     mysteries, etc. Plutarch has transmitted us the remarkable
     answer of a Spartan whom a priest wanted to confess.  "Is it
     to you or to God I am to confess?"  "To God," answered the
     priest: "In that case," replied the Spartan, "man, begone!"
     (Remarkable Savings of the Lacedemonians.)  The first
     Christians confessed their faults publicly, like the
     Essenians.  Afterwards, priests began to be established,
     with power of absolution from the sin of idolatry.  In the
     time of Theodosius, a woman having publicly confessed an
     intrigue with a deacon, bishop Necterius, and his successor
     Chrysostom, granted communion without confession.  It was
     not until the seventh century that the abbots of convents
     exacted from monks and nuns confession twice a year; and it
     was at a still later period that bishops of Rome generalized
     it.

     The Mussulmen, who suppose women to have no souls, are
     shocked at the idea of confession; and say; How can an
     honest man think of listening to the recital of the actions
     or the secret thoughts of a woman?  May we not also ask, on
     the other hand, how can an honest woman consent to reveal
     them?


      Thus by mutual reproaches the doctors of the different sects began to
      reveal all the crimes of their ministry—all the vices of their
      craft; and it was found that among all nations the spirit of the
      priesthood, their system of conduct, their actions their morals, were
      absolutely the same:
    

      That they had everywhere formed secret associations and corporations at
      enmity with the rest of society:*
    

     * That we may understand the general feelings of priests
     respecting the rest of mankind, whom they always call by the
     name of the people, let us hear one of the doctors of the
     church.  "The people," says Bishop Synnesius, in Calvit.
     page 315, "are desirous of being deceived, we cannot act
     otherwise respecting them.  The case was similar with the
     ancient priests of Egypt, and for this reason they shut
     themselves up in their temples, and there composed their
     mysteries, out of the reach of the eye of the people."  And
     forgetting what he has before just said, he adds: "for had
     the people been in the secret they might have been offended
     at the deception played upon them.  In the mean time how is
     it possible to conduct one's self otherwise with the people
     so long as they are people?  For my own part, to myself I
     shall always be a philosopher, but in dealing with the mass
     of mankind, I shall be a priest."

     "A little jargon," says Geogory Nazianzen to St. Jerome
     (Hieron. ad. Nep.) "is all that is necessary to impose on
     the people.  The less they comprehend, the more they admire.
     Our forefathers and doctors of the church have often said,
     not what they thought, but what circumstances and necessity
     dictated to them."

     "We endeavor," says Sanchoniaton, "to excite admiration by
     means of the marvellous." (Proep. Evang. lib. 3.)

     Such was the conduct of all the priests of antiquity, and is
     still that of the Bramins and Lamas who are the exact
     counterpart of the Egyptian priests.  Such was the practice
     of the Jesuits, who marched with hasty strides in the same
     career.  It is useless to point out the whole depravity of
     such a doctrine.  In general every association which has
     mystery for its basis, or an oath of secrecy, is a league of
     robbers against society, a league divided in its very bosom
     into knaves and dupes, or in other words agents and
     instruments.  It is thus we ought to judge of those modern
     clubs, which, under the name of Illuminatists, Martinists,
     Cagliostronists, and Mesmerites, infest Europe.  These
     societies are the follies and deceptions of the ancient
     Cabalists, Magicians, Orphies, etc., "who," says Plutarch,
     "led into errors of considerable magnitude, not only
     individuals, but kings and nations."


      That they had everywhere attributed to themselves prerogatives and
      immunities, by means of which they lived exempt from the burdens of other
      classes:
    

      That they everywhere avoided the toils of the laborer, the dangers of the
      soldier, and the disappointments of the merchant:
    

      That they lived everywhere in celibacy, to shun even the cares of a
      family:
    

      That, under the cloak of poverty, they found everywhere the secret of
      procuring wealth and all sorts of enjoyments:
    

      That under the name of mendicity they raised taxes to a greater amount
      than princes:
    

      That in the form of gifts and offerings they had established fixed and
      certain revenues exempt from charges:
    

      That under pretence of retirement and devotion they lived in idleness and
      licentiousness:
    

      That they had made a virtue of alms-giving, to live quietly on the labors
      of others:
    

      That they had invented the ceremonies of worship, as a means of attracting
      the reverence of the people, while they were playing the parts of gods, of
      whom they styled themselves the interpreters and mediators, to assume all
      their powers; that, with this design, they had (according to the degree of
      ignorance or information of their people) assumed by turns the character
      of astrologers, drawers of horoscopes, fortune-tellers, magicians,*
      necromancers, quacks, physicians, courtiers, confessors of princes, always
      aiming at the great object to govern for their own advantage:
    

     * What is a magician, in the sense in which people
     understand the word?  A man who by words and gestures
     pretends to act on supernatural beings, and compel them to
     descend at his call and obey his orders.  Such was the
     conduct of the ancient priests, and such is still that of
     all priests in idolatrous nations; for which reason we have
     given them the denomination of Magicians.

     And when a Christian priest pretends to make God descend
     from heaven, to fix him to a morsel of leaven, and render,
     by means of this talisman, souls pure and in a state of
     grace, what is this but a trick of magic?  And where is the
     difference between a Chaman of Tartary who invokes the
     Genii, or an Indian Bramin, who makes Vichenou descend in a
     vessel of water to drive away evil spirits? Yes, the
     identity of the spirit of priests in every age and country
     is fully established!  Every where it is the assumption of
     an exclusive privilege, the pretended faculty of moving at
     will the powers of nature; and this assumption is so direct
     a violation of the right of equality, that whenever the
     people shall regain their importance, they will forever
     abolish this sacrilegious kind of nobility, which has been
     the type and parent stock of the other species of nobility.


      That sometimes they had exalted the power of kings and consecrated their
      persons, to monopolize their favors, or participate their sway:
    

      That sometimes they had preached up the murder of tyrants (reserving it to
      themselves to define tyranny), to avenge themselves of their contempt or
      their disobedience:
    

      And that they always stigmatised with impiety whatever crossed their
      interests; that they hindered all public instruction, to exercise the
      monopoly of science; that finally, at all times and in all places, they
      had found the secret of living in peace in the midst of the anarchy they
      created, in safety under the despotism that they favored, in idleness
      amidst the industry they preached, and in abundance while surrounded with
      scarcity; and all this by carrying on the singular trade of selling words
      and gestures to credulous people, who purchase them as commodities of the
      greatest value.*
    

     * A curious work would be the comparative history of the
     agnuses of the pope and the pastils of the grand Lama.  It
     would be worth while to extend this idea to religions
     ceremonies in general, and to confront column by column, the
     analogous or contrasting points of faith and superstitious
     practices in all nations.  There is one more species of
     superstition which it would be equally salutary to cure,
     blind veneration for the great; and for this purpose it
     would be alone sufficient to write a minute detail of the
     private life of kings and princes.  No work could be so
     philosophical as this; and accordingly we have seen what a
     general outcry was excited among kings and the panders of
     kings, when the Anecdotes of the Court of Berlin first
     appeared.  What would be the alarm were the public put in
     possession of the sequel of this work?  Were the people
     fairly acquainted with all the absurdities of this species
     of idol, they would no longer be exposed to covet their
     specious pleasures of which the plausible and hollow
     appearance disturbs their peace, and hinders them from
     enjoying the much more solid happiness of their own
     condition.


      Then the different nations, in a transport of fury, were going to tear in
      pieces the men who had thus abused them; but the legislator, arresting
      this movement of violence, addressed the chiefs and doctors:
    

      "What!" said he, "instructors of nations, is it thus that you have
      deceived them?"
    

      And the terrified priests replied.
    

      "O legislator! we are men. The people are so superstitious! they have
      themselves encouraged these errors."*
    

     * Consider in this view the Brabanters.


      And the kings said:
    

      "O legislator! the people are so servile and so ignorant! they prostrated
      themselves before the yoke, which we scarcely dared to show them."*
    

     * The inhabitants of Vienna, for example, who harnessed
     themselves like cattle and drew the chariot of Leopold.


      Then the legislator, turning to the people—"People!" said he,
      "remember what you have just heard; they are two indelible truths. Yes,
      you yourselves cause the evils of which you complain; yourselves encourage
      the tyrants, by a base adulation of their power, by an imprudent
      admiration of their false beneficence, by servility in obedience, by
      licentiousness in liberty, and by a credulous reception of every
      imposition. On whom shall you wreak vengeance for the faults committed by
      your own ignorance and cupidity?"
    

      And the people, struck with confusion, remained in mournful silence.
    


 



</div></body></text></TEI>