<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Ruins; Or, Meditation on the Revolutions of Empires</title><author>Volney, Constantin-François (1757-1820)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Joseph Johnson</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1791</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="20">
      CHAPTER XX.
    

      THE SEARCH OF TRUTH.
    

      The people expressed their applause, and the legislator continued: To
      proceed with order, and avoid all confusion, let a spacious semicircle be
      left vacant in front of the altar of peace and union; let each system of
      religion, and each particular sect, erect its proper distinctive standard
      on the line of this semicircle; let its chiefs and doctors place
      themselves around the standard, and their followers form a column behind
      them.
    

      The semicircle being traced, and the order published, there instantly rose
      an innumerable multitude of standards, of all colors and of every form,
      like what we see in a great commercial port, when, on a day of rejoicing,
      a thousand different flags and streamers are floating from a forest of
      masts.
    

      At the sight of this prodigious diversity, I turned towards the Genius and
      said:
    

      I thought that the earth was divided only into eight or ten systems of
      faith, and I then despaired of a reconciliation; I now behold thousands of
      different sects, and how can I hope for concord?
    

      But these, replied the Genius, are not all; and yet they will be
      intolerant!
    

      Then, as the groups advanced to take their stations, he pointed out to me
      their distinctive marks, and thus began to explain their characters:
    

      That first group, said he, with a green banner bearing a crescent, a
      bandage, and a sabre, are the followers of the Arabian prophet. To say
      there is a God, without knowing what he is; to believe the words of a man,
      without understanding his language; to go into the desert to pray to God,
      who is everywhere; to wash the hands with water, and not abstain from
      blood; to fast all day, and eat all night; to give alms of their own
      goods, and to plunder those of others; such are the means of perfection
      instituted by Mahomet—such are the symbols of his followers; and
      whoever does not bear them is a reprobate, stricken with anathema, and
      devoted to the sword.
    

      A God of clemency, the author of life, has instituted these laws of
      oppression and murder: he made them for all the world, but has revealed
      them only to one man; he established them from all eternity, though he
      made them known but yesterday. These laws are abundantly sufficient for
      all purposes, and yet a volume is added to them. This volume was to
      diffuse light, to exhibit evidence, to lead men to perfection and
      happiness; and yet every page was so full of obscurities, ambiguities, and
      contradictions, that commentaries and explanations became necessary, even
      in the life-time of its apostle. Its interpreters, differing in opinion,
      divided into opposite and hostile sects. One maintains that Ali is the
      true successor; the other contends for Omar and Aboubekre. This denies the
      eternity of the Koran; that the necessity of ablutions and prayers. The
      Carmite forbids pilgrimages, and allows the use of wine; the Hakemite
      preaches the transmigration of souls. Thus they make up the number of
      seventy-two sects, whose banners are before you.* In this contestation,
      every one attributing the evidence of truth exclusively to himself, and
      taxing all others with heresy and rebellion, turns against them its
      sanguinary zeal. And their religion, which celebrates a mild and merciful
      God, the common father of all men,—changed to a torch of discord, a
      signal for war and murder, has not ceased for twelve hundred years to
      deluge the earth in blood, and to ravage and desolate the ancient
      hemisphere from centre to circumference.**
    

     * The Mussulmen enumerate in common seventy-two sects, but I
     read, while I resided among them, a work which gave an
     account of more than eighty,—all equally wise and
     important.

     ** Read the history of Islamism by its own writers, and you
     will be convinced that one of the principal causes of the
     wars which have desolated Asia and Africa, since the days of
     Mahomet, has been the apostolical fanaticism of its
     doctrine.  Caesar has been supposed to have destroyed three
     millions of men: it would be interesting to make a similar
     calculation respecting every founder of a religious system.


      Those men, distinguished by their enormous white turbans, their broad
      sleeves, and their long rosaries, are the Imans, the Mollas, and the
      Muftis; and near them are the Dervishes with pointed bonnets, and the
      Santons with dishevelled hair. Behold with what vehemence they recite
      their professions of faith! They are now beginning a dispute about the
      greater and lesser impurities—about the matter and the manner of
      ablutions,—about the attributes of God and his perfections—about
      the Chaitan, and the good and wicked angels,—about death, the
      resurrection, the interrogatory in the tomb, the judgment, the passage of
      the narrow bridge not broader than a hair, the balance of works, the pains
      of hell, and the joys of paradise.
    

      Next to these, that second more numerous group, with white banners
      intersected with crosses, are the followers of Jesus. Acknowledging the
      same God with the Mussulmans, founding their belief on the same books,
      admitting, like them, a first man who lost the human race by eating an
      apple, they hold them, however, in a holy abhorrence; and, out of pure
      piety, they call each other impious blasphemers.
    

      The great point of their dissension consists in this, that after admitting
      a God one and indivisible the Christian divides him into three persons,
      each of which he believes to be a complete and entire God, without ceasing
      to constitute an identical whole, by the indivisibility of the three. And
      he adds, that this being, who fills the universe, has reduced himself to
      the body of a man; and has assumed material, perishable, and limited
      organs, without ceasing to be immaterial, infinite, and eternal. The
      Mussulman who does not comprehend these mysteries, rejects them as
      follies, and the visions of a distempered brain; though he conceives
      perfectly well the eternity of the Koran, and the mission of the prophet:
      hence their implacable hatreds.
    

      Again, the Christians, divided among themselves on many points, have
      formed parties not less violent than the Mussulmans; and their quarrels
      are so much the more obstinate, as the objects of them are inaccessible to
      the senses and incapable of demonstration: their opinions, therefore, have
      no other basis but the will and caprice of the parties. Thus, while they
      agree that God is a being incomprehensible and unknown, they dispute,
      nevertheless, about his essence, his mode of acting, and his attributes.
      While they agree that his pretended transformation into man is an enigma
      above the human understanding, they dispute on the junction or distinction
      of his two wills and his two natures, on his change of substance, on the
      real or fictitious presence, on the mode of incarnation, etc.
    

      Hence those innumerable sects, of which two or three hundred have already
      perished, and three or four hundred others, which still subsist, display
      those numberless banners which here distract your sight.
    

      The first in order, surrounded by a group in varied and fantastic dress,
      that confused mixture of violet, red, white, black and speckled garments—with
      heads shaved, or with tonsures, or with short hair—with red hats,
      square bonnets, pointed mitres, or long beards, is the standard of the
      Roman pontiff, who, uniting the civil government to the priesthood, has
      erected the supremacy of his city into a point of religion, and made of
      his pride an article of faith.
    

      On his right you see the Greek pontiff, who, proud of the rivalship of his
      metropolis, sets up equal pretensions, and supports them against the
      Western church by the priority of that of the East. On the left are the
      standards of two recent chiefs,* who, shaking off a yoke that had become
      tyrannical, have raised altar against altar in their reform, and wrested
      half of Europe from the pope. Behind these are the subaltern sects,
      subdivided from the principal divisions, the Nestorians, the Eutycheans,
      the Jacobites, the Iconoclasts, the Anabaptists, the Presbyterians, the
      Wicliffites, the Osiandrians, the Manicheans, the Pietists, the Adamites,
      the Contemplatives, the Quakers, the Weepers, and a hundred others,** all
      of distinct parties, persecuting when strong, tolerant when weak, hating
      each other in the name of a God of peace, forming each an exclusive heaven
      in a religion of universal charity, dooming each other to pains without
      end in a future state, and realizing in this world the imaginary hell of
      the other.
    

     * Luther and Calvin.

     ** Consult upon this subject Dictionnaire des Herseies par
     l'Abbe Pluquet, in two volumes 8vo.: a work admirably
     calculated to inspire the mind with philosophy, in the sense
     that the Lacedemonians taught the children temperance by
     showing to them the drunken Helots.


      After this group, observing a lonely standard of the color of hyacinth,
      round which were assembled men clad in all the different dresses of Europe
      and Asia:
    

      At least, said I, to the Genius, we shall find unanimity here.
    

      Yes, said he, at first sight and by a momentary accident. Dost thou not
      know that system of worship?
    

      Then, perceiving in Hebrew letters the monogram of the name of God, and
      the palms which the Rabbins held in their hands:
    

      True, said I, these are the children of Moses, dispersed even to this day,
      abhorring every nation, and abhorred and persecuted by all.
    

      Yes, he replied, and for this reason, that, having neither the time nor
      liberty to dispute, they have the appearance of unanimity. But no sooner
      will they come together, compare their principles, and reason on their
      opinions, than they will separate as formerly, at least into two principal
      sects;* one of which, taking advantage of the silence of their legislator,
      and adhering to the literal sense of his books, will deny everything that
      is not clearly expressed therein; and on this principle will reject as
      profane inventions, the immortality of the soul, its transmigration to
      places of pain or pleasure, its resurrection, the final judgment, the good
      and bad angels, the revolt of the evil Genius, and all the poetical belief
      of a world to come. And this highly-favored people, whose perfection
      consists in a slight mutilation of their persons,—this atom of a
      people, which forms but a small wave in the ocean of mankind, and which
      insists that God has made nothing but for them, will by its schism reduce
      to one-half, its present trifling weight in the scale of the universe.
    

     * The Sadducees and Pharisees.


      He then showed me a neighboring group, composed of men dressed in white
      robes, wearing a veil over their mouths, and ranged around a banner of the
      color of the morning sky, on which was painted a globe cleft in two
      hemispheres, black and white: The same thing will happen, said he, to
      these children of Zoroaster,* the obscure remnant of a people once so
      powerful. At present, persecuted like the Jews, and dispersed among all
      nations, they receive without discussion the precepts of the
      representative of their prophet. But as soon as the Mobed and the
      Destours** shall assemble, they will renew the controversy about the good
      and the bad principle; on the combats of Ormuzd, God of light, and
      Ahrimanes, God of darkness; on the direct and allegorical sense; on the
      good and evil Genii; on the worship of fire and the elements; on
      impurities and ablutions; on the resurrection of the soul and body, or
      only of the soul;*** on the renovation of the present world, and on that
      which is to take its place. And the Parses will divide into sects, so much
      the more numerous, as their families will have contracted, during their
      dispersion, the manners and opinions of different nations.
    

     * They are the Parses, better known by the opprobrious name
     of Gaures or Guebres, another word for infidels.  They are
     in Asia what the Jews are in Europe.  The name of their pope
     or high priest is Mobed.

     ** That is to say, their priests.  See, respecting the rites
     of this religion, Henry Lord Hyde, and the Zendavesta.
     Their costume is a robe with a belt of four knots, and a
     veil over their mouth for fear of polluting the fire with
     their breath.

     *** The Zoroastrians are divided between two opinions; one
     party believing that both soul and body will rise, the other
     that it will be the soul only.  The Christians and
     Mahometans have embraced the most solid of the two.


      Next to these, remark those banners of an azure ground, painted with
      monstrous figures of human bodies, double, triple, and quadruple, with
      heads of lions, boars, and elephants, and tails of fishes and tortoises;
      these are the ensigns of the sects of India, who find their gods in
      various animals, and the souls of their fathers in reptiles and insects.
      These men support hospitals for hawks, serpents, and rats, and they abhor
      their fellow creatures! They purify themselves with the dung and urine of
      cows, and think themselves defiled by the touch of a man! They wear a net
      over the mouth, lest, in a fly, they should swallow a soul in a state of
      penance,* and they can see a Pariah** perish with hunger! They acknowledge
      the same gods, but they separate into hostile bands.
    

     * According to the system of the Metempsychosis, a soul, to
     undergo purification, passes into the body of some insect or
     animal.  It is of importance not to disturb this penance, as
     the work must in that case begin afresh.

     ** This is the name of a cast or tribe reputed unclean,
     because they eat of what has enjoyed life.


      The first standard, retired from the rest, bearing a figure with four
      heads, is that of Brama, who, though the creator of the universe, is
      without temples or followers; but, reduced to serve as a pedestal to the
      Lingam,* he contents himself with a little water which the Bramin throws
      every morning on his shoulder, reciting meanwhile an idle canticle in his
      praise.
    

     * See Sonnerat, Voyage aux Indes, vol. 1.


      The second, bearing a kite with a scarlet body and a white head, is that
      of Vichenou, who, though preserver of the world, has passed part of his
      life in wicked actions. You sometimes see him under the hideous form of a
      boar or a lion, tearing human entrails, or under that of a horse,* shortly
      to come armed with a sword to destroy the human race, blot out the stars,
      annihilate the planets, shake the earth, and force the great serpent to
      vomit a fire which shall consume the spheres.
    

     * These are the incarnations of Vichenou, or metamorphoses
     of the sun.  He is to come at the end of the world, that is,
     at the expiration of the great period, in the form of a
     horse, like the four horses of the Apocalypse.


      The third is that of Chiven, God of destruction and desolation, who has,
      however, for his emblem the symbol of generation. He is the most wicked of
      the three, and he has the most followers. These men, proud of his
      character, express in their devotions to him their contempt for the other
      gods,* his equals and brothers; and, in imitation of his inconsistencies,
      while they profess great modesty and chastity, they publicly crown with
      flowers, and sprinkle with milk and honey, the obscene image of the
      Lingam.
    

     * When a sectary of Chiven hears the name of Vichenou
     pronounced, he stops his ears, runs, and purifies himself.


      In the rear of these, approach the smaller standards of a multitude of
      gods—male, female, and hermaphrodite. These are friends and
      relations of the principal gods, who have passed their lives in wars among
      themselves, and their followers imitate them. These gods have need of
      nothing, and they are constantly receiving presents; they are omnipotent
      and omnipresent, and a priest, by muttering a few words, shuts them up in
      an idol or a pitcher, to sell their favors for his own benefit.
    

      Beyond these, that cloud of standards, which, on a yellow ground, common
      to them all, bear various emblems, are those of the same god, who reins
      under different names in the nations of the East. The Chinese adores him
      in Fot,* the Japanese in Budso, the Ceylonese in Bedhou, the people of
      Laos in Chekia, of Pegu in Phta, of Siam in Sommona-Kodom, of Thibet in
      Budd and in La. Agreeing in some points of his history, they all celebrate
      his life of penitence, his mortifications, his fastings, his functions of
      mediator and expiator, the enmity between him and another god, his
      adversary, their battles, and his ascendency. But as they disagree on the
      means of pleasing him, they dispute about rites and ceremonies, and about
      the dogmas of interior doctrine and of public doctrine. That Japanese
      Bonze, with a yellow robe and naked head, preaches the eternity of souls,
      and their successive transmigrations into various bodies; near him, the
      Sintoist denies that souls can exist separate from the senses,** and
      maintains that they are only the effect of the organs to which they
      belong, and with which they must perish, as the sound of the flute
      perishes with the flute. Near him, the Siamese, with his eyebrows shaved,
      and a talipat screen*** in his hand, recommends alms, offerings, and
      expiations, at the same time that he preaches blind necessity and
      inexorable fate. The Chinese vo-chung sacrifices to the souls of his
      ancestors; and next him, the follower of Confucius interrogates his
      destiny in the cast of dice and the movement of the stars.**** That child,
      surrounded by a swarm of priests in yellow robes and hats, is the Grand
      Lama, in whom the god of Thibet has just become incarnate.*5 But a rival
      has arisen who partakes this benefit with him; and the Kalmouc on the
      banks of the Baikal, has a God similar to the inhabitant of Lasa. And they
      agree, also, in one important point—that god can inhabit only a
      human body. They both laugh at the stupidity of the Indian who pays homage
      to cow-dung, though they themselves consecrate the excrements of their
      high-priest.*6
    

     * The original name of this god is Baits, which in Hebrew
     signifies an egg.  The Arabs pronounce it Baidh, giving to
     the dh an emphatic sound which makes it approach to dz.
     Kempfer, an acurate traveler, writes it Budso, which must be
     pronounced Boudso, whence is derived the name of Budsoist
     and of Bonze, applied to the priests.  Clement of
     Alexandria, in his Stromata, writes it Bedou, as it is
     pronounced also by the Chingulais; and Saint Jerome, Boudda
     and Boutta.  At Thibet they call it Budd; and hence the name
     of the country called Boud-tan and Ti-budd: it was in this
     province that this system of religion was first inculcated
     in Upper Asia; La is a corruption of Allah, the name of God
     in the Syriac language, from which many of the eastern
     dialects appear to be derived.  The Chinese having neither b
     nor d, have supplied their place by f and t, and have
     therefore said Fout.

     ** See in Kempfer the doctrine of the Sintoists, which is a
     mixture of that of Epicurus and of the Stoics.

     *** It is a leaf of the Latanier species of the palm-tree.
     Hence the bonzes of Siam take the appellation of Talapoin.
     The use of this screen is an exclusive privilege.

     **** The sectaries of Confucius are no less addicted to
     astrology than the bonzes.  It is indeed the malady of every
     eastern nation.

     *5 The Delai-La-Ma, or immense high priest of La, is the
     same person whom we find mentioned in our old books of
     travels, by the name of Prester John, from a corruption of
     the Persian word Djehan, which signifies the world, to which
     has been prefixed the French word prestre or pretre, priest.
     Thus the priest world, and the god world are in the Persian
     idiom the same.

     *6 In a recent expedition the English have found certain
     idols of the Lamas filled in the inside with sacred pastils
     from the close stool of the high priest.  Mr. Hastings, and
     Colonel Pollier, who is now at Lausanne, are living
     witnesses of this fact, and undoubtedly worthy of credit.
     It will be very extraordinary to observe, that this
     disgusting ceremony is connected with a profound
     philosophical system, to wit, that of the metempsychosis,
     admitted by the Lamas.  When the Tartars swallow, the sacred
     relics, which they are accustomed to do, they imitate the
     laws of the universe, the parts of which are incessantly
     absorbed and pass into the substance of each other.  It is
     upon the model of the serpent who devours his tail, and this
     serpent is Budd and the world.


      After these, a crowd of other banners, which no man could number, came
      forward into sight; and the genius exclaimed:
    

      I should never finish the detail of all the systems of faith which divide
      these nations. Here the hordes of Tartars adore, in the forms of beasts,
      birds, and insects, the good and evil Genii; who, under a principal, but
      indolent god, govern the universe. In their idolatry they call to mind the
      ancient paganism of the West. You observe the fantastical dress of the
      Chamans; who, under a robe of leather, hung round with bells and rattles,
      idols of iron, claws of birds, skins of snakes and heads of owls, invoke,
      with frantic cries and factitious convulsions, the dead to deceive the
      living. There, the black tribes of Africa exhibit the same opinions in the
      worship of their fetiches. See the inhabitant of Juida worship god in a
      great snake, which, unluckily, the swine delight to eat.* The Teleutean
      attires his god in a coat of several colors, like a Russian soldier.** The
      Kamchadale, observing that everything goes wrong in his frozen country,
      considers god as an old ill-natured man, smoking his pipe and hunting
      foxes and martins in his sledge.***
    

     * It frequently happens that the swine devour the very
     species of serpents the negroes adore, which is a source of
     great desolation in the country.  President de Brosses has
     given us, in his History of the Fetiche, a curious
     collection of absurdities of this nature.

     ** The Teleuteans, a Tartar nation, paint God as wearing a
     vesture of all colors, particularly red and green; and as
     these constitute the uniform of the Russian dragoons, they
     compare him to this description of soldiers.  The Egyptians
     also dress the God World in a garment of every color.
     Eusebius Proep. Evang. p 115.  The Teleuteans call God Bou,
     which is only an alteration of Boudd, the God Egg and World.

     *** Consult upon this subject a work entitled, Description
     des Peuples, soumis a la Russie, and it will be found that
     the picture is not overcharged.


      But you may still behold a hundred savage nations who have none of the
      ideas of civilized people respecting God, the soul, another world, and a
      future life; who have formed no system of worship; and who nevertheless
      enjoy the rich gifts of nature in the irreligion in which she has created
      them.
    


 



</div></body></text></TEI>