<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Ruins; Or, Meditation on the Revolutions of Empires</title><author>Volney, Constantin-François (1757-1820)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Joseph Johnson</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1791</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="21">
      CHAPTER XXI.
    

      PROBLEM OF RELIGIOUS CONTRADICTIONS.
    

      The various groups having taken their places, an unbounded silence
      succeeded to the murmurs of the multitude; and the legislator said:
    

      Chiefs and doctors of mankind! You remark how the nations, living apart,
      have hitherto followed different paths, each believing its own to be that
      of truth. If, however, truth is one, and opinions are various, it is
      evident that some are in error. If, then, such vast numbers of us are in
      the wrong, who shall dare to say, "I am in the right?" Begin, therefore,
      by being indulgent in your dissensions. Let us all seek truth as if no one
      possessed it. The opinions which to this day have governed the world,
      originating from chance, propagated in obscurity, admitted without
      discussion, accredited by a love of novelty and imitation, have usurped
      their empire in a clandestine manner. It is time, if they are well
      founded, to give a solemn stamp to their certainty, and legitimize their
      existence. Let us summon them this day to a general scrutiny, let each
      propound his creed, let the whole assembly be the judge, and let that
      alone be acknowledged as true which is so for the whole human race.
    

      Then, by order of position, the representative of the first standard on
      the left was allowed to speak:
    

      "You are not permitted to doubt," said their chief, "that our doctrine is
      the only true and infallible one. FIRST, it is revealed by God himself—"
    

      "So is ours," cried all the other standards, "and you are not permitted to
      doubt it."
    

      "But at least," said the legislator, "you must prove it, for we cannot
      believe what we do not know."
    

      "Our doctrine is proved," replied the first standard, "by numerous facts,
      by a multitude of miracles, by resurrections of the dead, by rivers dried
      up, by mountains removed—"
    

      "And we also have numberless miracles," cried all the others, and each
      began to recount the most incredible things.
    

      "THEIR miracles," said the first standard, "are imaginary, or the fictions
      of the evil spirit, who has deluded them."
    

      "They are yours," said the others, "that are imaginary;" and each group,
      speaking of itself, cried out:
    

      "None but ours are true, all the others are false."
    

      The legislator then asked: "Have you living witnesses of the facts?"
    

      "No," replied they all; "the facts are ancient, the witnesses are dead,
      but their writings remain."
    

      "Be it so," replied the legislator; "but if they contradict each other,
      who shall reconcile them?"
    

      "Just judge!" cried one of the standards, "the proof that our witnesses
      have seen the truth is, that they died to confirm it; and our faith is
      sealed by the blood of martyrs."
    

      "And ours too," said the other standards; "we have thousands of martyrs
      who have died in the most excruciating torments, without ever denying the
      truth."
    

      Then the Christians of every sect, the Mussulmans, the Indians, the
      Japanese, recited endless legends of confessors, martyrs, penitents, etc.
    

      And one of these parties, having denied the martyrology of the others:
      "Well," said they, "we will then die ourselves to prove the truth of our
      belief."
    

      And instantly a crowd of men, of every religion and of every sect,
      presented themselves to suffer the torments of death. Many even began to
      tear their arms, and to beat their heads and breasts, without discovering
      any symptom of pain.
    

      But the legislator, preventing them—"O men!" said he, "hear my words
      with patience. If you die to prove that two and two make four, will your
      death add any thing to this truth?"
    

      "No!" answered all.
    

      "And if you die to prove that they make five, will that make them five?"
    

      Again they all answered, "No."
    

      "What, then, is your persuasion to prove, if it changes not the existence
      of things? Truth is one—your persuasions are various; many of you,
      therefore, are in error. Now, if man, as is evident, can persuade himself
      of error, what is the persuasion of man to prove?
    

      "If error has its martyrs, what is the sure criterion of truth?
    

      "If the evil spirit works miracles, what is the distinctive character of
      God?
    

      "Besides, why resort forever to incomplete and insufficient miracles?
      Instead of changing the course of nature, why not rather change opinions?
      Why murder and terrify men, instead of instructing and correcting them?
    

      "O credulous, but opinionated mortals! none of us know what was done
      yesterday, what is doing to-day even under our eyes; and we swear to what
      was done two thousand years ago!
    

      "Oh, the weakness and yet the pride of men! The laws of nature are
      unchangeable and profound—our minds are full of illusion and
      frivolity—and yet we would comprehend every thing—determine
      every thing! Forgetting that it is easier for the whole human race to be
      in error, than to change the nature of the smallest atom."
    

      "Well, then," said one of the doctors, "let us lay aside the evidence of
      fact, since it is uncertain; let us come to argument—to the proofs
      inherent in the doctrine."
    

      Then came forward, with a look of confidence, an Iman of the law of
      Mahomet; and, having advanced into the circle, turned towards Mecca, and
      recited with great fervor his confession of faith. "Praise be to God,"
      said he, with a solemn and imposing voice, "the light shines with full
      evidence, and the truth has no need of examination." Then, showing the
      Koran, he exclaimed: "Here is the light of truth in its proper essence.
      There is no doubt in this book. It conducts with safety him who walks in
      darkness, and who receives without discussion the divine word which
      descended on the prophet, to save the simple and confound the wise. God
      has established Mahomet his minister on earth; he has given him the world,
      that he may subdue with the sword whoever shall refuse to receive his law.
      Infidels dispute, and will not believe; their obduracy comes from God, who
      has hardened their hearts to deliver them to dreadful punishments."*
    

     * This passage contains the sense and nearly the very words
     of the first chapter of the Koran; and the reader will
     observe in general, that, in the pictures that follow, the
     writer has endeavored to give as accurately as possible the
     letter and spirit of the opinions of each party.


      At these words a violent murmur arose on all sides, and silenced the
      speaker. "Who is this man," cried all the groups, "who thus insults us
      without a cause? What right has he to impose his creed on us as conqueror
      and tyrant? Has not God endowed us, as well as him, with eyes,
      understanding, and reason? And have we not an equal right to use them, in
      choosing what to believe and what to reject? If he attacks us, shall we
      not defend ourselves? If he likes to believe without examination, must we
      therefore not examine before we believe?
    

      "And what is this luminous doctrine that fears the light? What is this
      apostle of a God of clemency, who preaches nothing but murder and carnage?
      What is this God of justice, who punishes blindness which he himself has
      made? If violence and persecution are the arguments of truth, are
      gentleness and charity the signs of falsehood?"
    

      A man then advancing from a neighboring group, said to the Iman:
    

      "Admitting that Mahomet is the apostle of the best doctrine,—the
      prophet of the true religion,—have the goodness at least to tell us
      whether, in the practice of his doctrine, we are to follow his son-in-law
      Ali, or his vicars Omar and Aboubekre?"*
    

     * These are the two grand parties into which the Mussulmans
     are divided.  The Turks have embraced the second, the
     Persians the first.


      At the sound of these names a terrible schism arose among the Mussulmans
      themselves. The partisans of Ali and those of Omar, calling out heretics
      and blasphemers, loaded each other with execrations. The quarrel became so
      violent that neighboring groups were obliged to interfere, to prevent
      their coming to blows. At length, tranquillity being somewhat restored,
      the legislator said to the Imans:
    

      "See the consequences of your principles! If you yourselves were to carry
      them into practice, you would destroy each other to the last man. Is it
      not the first law of God that man should live?"
    

      Then, addressing himself to the other groups, he continued:
    

      "Doubtless this intolerant and exclusive spirit shocks every idea of
      justice, and overturns the whole foundation of morals and society; but
      before we totally reject this code of doctrine, is it not proper to hear
      some of its dogmas? Let us not pronounce on the forms, without having some
      knowledge of the substance."
    

      The groups having consented, the Iman began to expound how God, having
      sent to the nations lost in idolatry twenty-four thousand prophets, had
      finally sent the last, the seal and perfection of all, Mahomet; on whom be
      the salvation of peace: how, to prevent the divine word from being any
      longer perverted by infidels, the supreme goodness had itself written the
      pages of the Koran. Then, explaining the particular dogmas of Islamism,
      the Iman unfolded how the Koran, partaking of the divine nature, was
      uncreated and eternal, like its author: how it had been sent leaf by leaf,
      in twenty-four thousand nocturnal apparitions of the angel Gabriel: how
      the angel announced himself by a gentle knocking, which threw the prophet
      into a cold sweat: how in the vision of one night he had travelled over
      ninety heavens, riding on the beast Borack, half horse and half woman:
      how, endowed with the gift of miracles, he walked in the sunshine without
      a shadow, turned dry trees to green, filled wells and cisterns with water,
      and split in two the body of the moon: how, by divine command, Mahomet had
      propagated, sword in hand, the religion the most worthy of God by its
      sublimity, and the most proper for men by the simplicity of its practice;
      since it consisted in only eight or ten points:—To profess the unity
      of God; to acknowledge Mahomet as his only prophet; to pray five times a
      day; to fast one month in the year; to go to Mecca once in our life; to
      pay the tenth of all we possess; to drink no wine; to eat no pork; and to
      make war upon the infidels.* He taught that by these means every Mussulman
      becoming himself an apostle and martyr, should enjoy in this world many
      blessings; and at his death, his soul, weighed in the balance of works,
      and absolved by the two black angels, should pass the infernal pit on the
      bridge as narrow as a hair and as sharp as the edge of a sword, and should
      finally be received to a region of delight, which is watered with rivers
      of milk and honey, and embalmed in all the perfumes of India and Arabia;
      and where the celestial Houris—virgins always chaste—are
      eternally crowning with repeated favors the elect of God, who preserve an
      eternal youth.
    

     * Whatever the advocates for the philosophy and civilization
     of the Turks may assert, to make war upon infidels is
     considered by them as an obligatory precept and an act of
     religion.  See Reland de Relig. Mahom.


      At these words an involuntary smile was seen on all their lips; and the
      various groups, reasoning on these articles of faith, exclaimed with one
      voice:
    

      "Is it possible that reasonable beings can admit such reveries? Would you
      not think it a chapter from The Thousand and One Nights?"
    

      A Samoyede advanced into the circle: "The paradise of Mahomet," said he,
      "appears to me very good; but one of the means of gaining it is
      embarrassing: for if we must neither eat nor drink between the rising and
      setting sun, as he has ordered, how are we to practise that fast in my
      country, where the sun continues above the horizon six months without
      setting?"
    

      "That is impossible," cried all the Mussulman doctors, to support the
      teaching of the prophet; but a hundred nations having attested the fact,
      the infallibility of Mahomet could not but receive a severe shock.
    

      "It is singular," said an European, "that God should be constantly
      revealing what takes place in heaven, without ever instructing us what is
      doing on the earth."
    

      "For my part," said an American, "I find a great difficulty in the
      pilgrimage. For suppose twenty-five years to a generation, and only a
      hundred millions of males on the globe,—each being obliged to go to
      Mecca once in his life,—there must be four millions a year on the
      journey; and as it would be impracticable for them to return the same
      year, the numbers would be doubled—that is, eight millions: where
      would you find provisions, lodgings, water, vessels, for this universal
      procession? Here must be miracles indeed!"
    

      "The proof," said a catholic doctor, "that the religion of Mahomet is not
      revealed, is that the greater part of the ideas which serve for its basis
      existed a long time before, and that it is only a confused mixture of
      truths disfigured and taken from our holy religion and from that of the
      Jews; which an ambitious man has made to serve his projects of domination,
      and his worldly views. Look through his book; you will see nothing there
      but the histories of the Bible and the Gospel travestied into absurd
      fables—into a tissue of vague and contradictory declamations, and
      ridiculous or dangerous precepts.
    

      "Analyze the spirit of these precepts, and the conduct of their apostle;
      you will find there an artful and audacious character, which, to obtain
      its end, works ably it is true, on the passions of the people it had to
      govern. It is speaking to simple men, and it entertains them with
      miracles; they are ignorant and jealous, and it flatters their vanity by
      despising science; they are poor and rapacious, and it excites their
      cupidity by the hope of pillage; having nothing at first to give them on
      earth, it tells them of treasures in heaven; it teaches them to desire
      death as a supreme good; it threatens cowards with hell; it rewards the
      brave with paradise; it sustains the weak with the opinion of fatality; in
      short, it produces the attachment it wants by all the allurements of
      sense, and all the power of the passions.
    

      "How different is the character of our religion! and how completely does
      its empire, founded on the counteraction of the natural temper, and the
      mortification of all our passions, prove its divine origin! How forcibly
      does its mild and compassionate morality, its affections altogether
      spiritual, attest its emanation from God! Many of its doctrines, it is
      true, soar above the reach of the understanding, and impose on reason a
      respectful silence; but this more fully demonstrates its revelation, since
      the human mind could never have imagined such mysteries."
    

      Then, holding the Bible in one hand and the four Gospels in the other, the
      doctor began to relate that, in the beginning, God, after passing an
      eternity in idleness, took the resolution, without any known cause, of
      making the world out of nothing; that having created the whole universe in
      six days, he found himself fatigued on the seventh; that having placed the
      first human pair in a garden of delights, to make them completely happy,
      he forbade their tasting a particular fruit which he placed within their
      reach; that these first parents, having yielded to the temptation, all
      their race (which were not yet born) had been condemned to bear the
      penalty of a fault which they had not committed; that, after having left
      the human race to damn themselves for four or five thousand years, this
      God of mercy ordered a well beloved son, whom he had engendered without a
      mother, and who was as old as himself, to go and be put to death on the
      earth; and this for the salvation of mankind; of whom much the greater
      portion, nevertheless, have ever since continued in the way of perdition;
      that to remedy this new difficulty, this same God, born of a virgin,
      having died and risen from the dead, assumes a new existence every day,
      and in the form of a piece of bread, multiplies himself by millions at the
      voice of one of the basest of men. Then, passing on to the doctrine of the
      sacraments, he was going to treat at large on the power of absolution and
      reprobation, of the means of purging all sins by a little water and a few
      words, when, uttering the words indulgence, power of the pope, sufficient
      grace, and efficacious grace, he was interrupted by a thousand cries.
    

      "It is a horrible abuse," cried the Lutherans, "to pretend to remit sins
      for money."
    

      "The notion of the real presence," cried the Calvinists, "is contrary to
      the text of the Gospel."
    

      "The pope has no right to decide anything of himself," cried the
      Jansenists; and thirty other sects rising up, and accusing each other of
      heresies and errors, it was no longer possible to hear anything
      distinctly.
    

      Silence being at last restored, the Mussulmans observed to the legislator:
    

      "Since you have rejected our doctrine as containing things incredible, can
      you admit that of the Christians? Is not theirs still more contrary to
      common sense and justice? A God, immaterial and infinite, to become a man!
      to have a son as old as himself! This god-man to become bread, to be eaten
      and digested! Have we any thing equal to that? Have the Christians an
      exclusive right of setting up a blind faith? And will you grant them
      privileges of belief to our detriment?"
    

      Some savage tribes then advanced: "What!" said they, "because a man and
      woman ate an apple six thousand years ago, all the human race are damned?
      And you call God just? What tyrant ever rendered children responsible for
      the faults of their fathers? What man can answer for the actions of
      another? Does not this overturn every idea of justice and of reason?"
    

      Others exclaimed: "Where are the proofs, the witnesses of these pretended
      facts? Can we receive them without examining the evidence? The least
      action in a court of justice requires two witnesses; and we are ordered to
      believe all this on mere tradition and hearsay!"
    

      A Jewish Rabbin then addressing the assembly, said: "As to the fundamental
      facts, we are sureties; but with regard to their form and their
      application, the case is different, and the Christians are here condemned
      by their own arguments. For they cannot deny that we are the original
      source from which they are derived—the primitive stock on which they
      are grafted; and hence the reasoning is very short: Either our law is from
      God, and then theirs is a heresy, since it differs from ours, or our law
      is not from God, and then theirs falls at the same time."
    

      "But you must make this distinction," replied the Christian: "Your law is
      from God as typical and preparative, but not as final and absolute: you
      are the image of which we are the substance."
    

      "We know," replied the Rabbin, "that such are your pretensions; but they
      are absolutely gratuitous and false. Your system turns altogether on
      mystical meanings, visionary and allegorical interpretations.* With
      violent distortions on the letter of our books, you substitute the most
      chimerical ideas for the true ones, and find in them whatever pleases you;
      as a roving imagination will find figures in the clouds. Thus you have
      made a spiritual Messiah of that which, in the spirit of our prophets, is
      only a temporal king. You have made a redemption of the human race out of
      the simple re-establishment of our nation. Your conception of the Virgin
      is founded on a single phrase, of which you have changed the meaning. Thus
      you make from our Scriptures whatever your fancy dictates; you even find
      there your trinity; though there is not a word that has the most distant
      allusion to such a thing; and it is an invention of profane writers,
      admitted into your system with a host of other opinions, of every religion
      and of every sect, during the anarchy of the first three centuries of your
      era."
    

     * When we read the Fathers of the church, and see upon what
     arguments they have built the edifice of religion, we are
     inexpressibly astonished with their credulity or their
     knavery: but allegory was the rage of that period; the
     Pagans employed it to explain the actions of their gods, and
     the Christians acted in the same spirit when they employed
     it after their fashion.


      At these words, the Christian doctors, crying sacrilege and blasphemy,
      sprang forward in a transport of fury to fall upon the Jew; and a troop of
      monks, in motley dresses of black and white, advanced with a standard on
      which were painted pincers, gridirons, lighted fagots, and the words
      Justice, Charity, Mercy.* "It is necessary," said they, "to make an
      example of these impious wretches, and burn them for the glory of God."
      They began even to prepare the pile, when a Mussulman answered in a strain
      of irony:
    

      "This, then, is that religion of peace, that meek and beneficent system
      which you so much extol! This is that evangelical charity which combats
      infidelity with persuasive mildness, and repays injuries with patience! Ye
      hypocrites! It is thus that you deceive mankind—thus that you
      propagate your accursed errors! When you were weak, you preached liberty,
      toleration, peace; when you are strong, you practise persecution and
      violence—"
    

     * This description answers exactly to the banner of the
     Inquisition of Spanish Jacobins.


      And he was going to begin the history of the wars and slaughters of
      Christianity, when the legislator, demanding silence, suspended this scene
      of discord.
    

      The monks, affecting a tone of meekness and humility, exclaimed: "It is
      not ourselves that we would avenge; it is the cause of God; it is the
      glory of God that we defend."
    

      "And what right have you, more than we," said the Imans, "to constitute
      yourselves the representatives of God? Have you privileges that we have
      not? Are you not men like us?"
    

      "To defend God," said another group, "to pretend to avenge him, is to
      insult his wisdom and his power. Does he not know, better than men, what
      befits his dignity?"
    

      "Yes," replied the monks, "but his ways are secret."
    

      "And it remains for you to prove," said the Rabbins, "that you have the
      exclusive privilege of understanding them."
    

      Then, proud of finding supporters to their cause, the Jews thought that
      the books of Moses were going to be triumphant, when the Mobed (high
      priest) of the Parses obtained leave to speak.
    

      "We have heard," said he, "the account of the Jews and Christians of the
      origin of the world; and, though greatly mutilated, we find in it some
      facts which we admit. But we deny that they are to be attributed to the
      legislator of the Hebrews. It was not he who made known to men these
      sublime truths, these celestial events. It was not to him that God
      revealed them, but to our holy prophet Zoroaster: and the proof of this is
      in the very books that they refer to. Examine with attention the laws, the
      ceremonies, the precepts established by Moses in those books; you will not
      find the slightest indication, either expressed or understood, of what
      constitutes the basis of the Jewish and Christian theology. You nowhere
      find the least trace of the immortality of the soul, or of a future life,
      or of heaven, or of hell, or of the revolt of the principal angel, author
      of the evils of the human race. These ideas were not known to Moses, and
      the reason is very obvious: it was not till four centuries afterwards that
      Zoroaster first evangelized them in Asia.*
    

     * See the Chronology of the Twelve Ages, in which I conceive
     myself to have clearly proved that Moses lived about 1,400
     years before Jesus Christ, and Zoroaster about a thousand.


      "Thus," continued the Mobed, turning to the Rabbins, "it was not till
      after that epoch, that is to say, in the time of your first kings, that
      these ideas began to appear in your writers; and then their appearance was
      obscure and gradual, according to the progress of the political relations
      between your ancestors and ours. It was especially when, having been
      conquered by the kings of Nineveh and Babylon and transported to the banks
      of the Tygris and the Euphrates, where they resided for three successive
      generations, that they imbibed manners and opinions which had been
      rejected as contrary to their law. When our king Cyrus had delivered them
      from slavery, their heart was won to us by gratitude; they became our
      disciples and imitators; and they admitted our dogmas in the revision of
      their books;* for your Genesis, in particular, was never the work of
      Moses, but a compilation drawn up after the return from the Babylonian
      captivity, in which are inserted the Chaldean opinions of the origin of
      the world.
    

     * In the first periods of the Christian church, not only the
     most learned of those who have since been denominated
     heretics, but many of the orthodox conceived Moses to have
     written neither the law nor the Pentateuch, but that the
     work was a compilation made by the elders of the people and
     the Seventy, who, after the death of Moses, collected his
     scattered ordinances, and mixed with them things that were
     extraneous; similar to what happened as to the Koran of
     Mahomet.  See Les Clementines, Homel. 2. sect. 51. and
     Homel. 3. sect. 42.

     Modern critics, more enlightened or more attentive than the
     ancients, have found in Genesis in particular, marks of its
     having been composed on the return from the captivity; but
     the principal proofs have escaped them.  These I mean to
     exhibit in an analysis of the book of Genesis, in which I
     shall demonstrate that the tenth chapter, among others,
     which treats of the pretended generations of the man called
     Noah, is a real geographical picture of the world, as it was
     known to the Hebrews at the epoch of the captivity, which
     was bounded by Greece or Hellas at the West, mount Caucasus
     at the North, Persia at the East, and Arabia and Upper Egypt
     at the South. All the pretended personages from Adam to
     Abraham, or his father Terah, are mythological beings,
     stars, constellations, countries. Adam is Bootes: Noah is
     Osiris: Xisuthrus Janus, Saturn; that is to say Capricorn,
     or the celestial Genius that opened the year.  The
     Alexandrian Chronicle says expressly, page 85, that Nimrod
     was supposed by the Persians to be their first king, as
     having invented the art of hunting, and that he was
     translated into heaven, where he appears under the name of
     Orion.


      "At first the pure followers of the law, opposing to the emigrants the
      letter of the text and the absolute silence of the prophet, endeavored to
      repel these innovations; but they ultimately prevailed, and our doctrine,
      modified by your ideas, gave rise to a new sect.
    

      "You expected a king to restore your political independence; we announced
      a God to regenerate and save mankind. From this combination of ideas, your
      Essenians laid the foundation of Christianity: and whatever your
      pretensions may be, Jews, Christians, Mussulmans, you are, in your system
      of spiritual beings, only the blundering followers of Zoroaster."
    

      The Mobed, then passing on to the details of his religion, quoting from
      the Zadder and the Zendavesta, recounted, in the same order as they are
      found in the book of Genesis, the creation of the world in six gahans,*
      the formation of a first man and a first woman, in a divine place, under
      the reign of perfect good; the introduction of evil into the world by the
      great snake, emblem of Ahrimanes; the revolt and battles of the Genius of
      evil and darkness against Ormuzd, God of good and of light; the division
      of the angels into white and black, or good and bad; their hierarchal
      orders, cherubim, seraphim, thrones, dominions, etc.; the end of the world
      at the close of six thousand years; the coming of the lamb, the
      regenerator of nature; the new world; the future life, and the regions of
      happiness and misery; the passage of souls over the bridge of the
      bottomless pit; the celebration of the mysteries of Mithras; the
      unleavened bread which the initiated eat; the baptism of new-born
      children; the unction of the dead; the confession of sins; and, in a word,
      he recited so many things analagous to those of the three preceding
      religions, that his discourse seemed like a commentary or a continuation
      of the Koran or the Apocalypse.**
    

     * Or periods, or in six gahan-bars, that is six periods of
     time. These periods are what Zoroaster calls the thousands
     of God or of light, meaning the six summer months.  In the
     first, say the Persians, God created (arranged in order) the
     heavens; in the second the waters; in the third the earth;
     in the fourth trees; in the fifth animals; and in the sixth
     man; corresponding with the account in Genesis.  For
     particulars see Hyde, ch. 9, and Henry Lord, ch. 2, on the
     religion of the ancient Persians.  It is remarkable that the
     same tradition is found in the sacred books of the
     Etrurians, which relate that the fabricator of all things
     had comprised the duration of his work in a period of twelve
     thousand years, which period was distributed to the twelve
     houses of the sun.  In the first thousand, God made heaven
     and earth; in the second the firmament; in the third the sea
     and the waters; in the fourth the sun, moon and stars; in
     the fifth the souls of animals, birds, and reptiles; in the
     sixth man.  See Suidas, at the word Tyrrhena; which shows
     first the identity of their theological and astrological
     opinions; and, secondly, the identity, or rather confusion
     of ideas, between absolute and systematical creation; that
     is, the periods assigned for renewing the face of nature,
     which were at first the period of the year, and afterwards
     periods of 60, of 600, of 25,000, of 36,000 and of 432,000
     years.

     ** The modern Parses and the ancient Mithriacs, who are the
     same sect, observe all the Christian sacraments, even the
     laying on of hands in confirmation.  The priest of Mithra,
     says Tertullian, (de Proescriptione, ch. 40) promises
     absolution from sin on confession and baptism; and, if I
     rightly remember, Mithra marks his soldiers in the forehead,
     with the chrism called in the Egyptian Kouphi; he celebrates
     the sacrifice of bread, which is the resurrection, and
     presents the crown to his followers, menacing them at the
     same time with the sword, etc.

     In these mysteries they tried the courage of the initiated
     with a thousand terrors, presenting fire to his face, a
     sword to his breast, etc.; they also offered him a crown,
     which he refused, saying, God is my crown: and this crown is
     to be seen in the celestial sphere by the side of Bootes.
     The personages in these mysteries were distinguished by the
     names of the animal constellations.  The ceremony of mass is
     nothing more than an imitation of these mysteries and those
     of Eleusis.  The benediction, the Lord be with you, is a
     literal translation of the formula of admission chou-k, am,
     p-ka.  See Beausob. Hist. Du Manicheisme, vol. ii.


      But the Jewish, Christian, and Mahometan doctors, crying out against this
      recital, and treating the Parses as idolaters and worshippers of fire,
      charged them with falsehood, interpolations, falsification of facts; and
      there arose a violent dispute as to the dates of the events, their order
      and succession, the origin of the doctrines, their transmission from
      nation to nation, the authenticity of the books on which they are founded,
      the epoch of their composition, the character of their compilers, and the
      validity of their testimony. And the various parties, pointing out
      reciprocally to each other, the contradictions, improbabilities, and
      forgeries, accused one another of having established their belief on
      popular rumors, vague traditions, and absurd fables, invented without
      discernment, and admitted without examination by unknown, partial, or
      ignorant writers, at uncertain or unknown epochs.
    

      A great murmur now arose from under the standards of the various Indian
      sects; and the Bramins, protesting against the pretensions of the Jews and
      the Parses, said:
    

      "What are these new and almost unheard of nations, who arrogantly set
      themselves up as the sources of the human race, and the depositaries of
      its archives? To hear their calculations of five or six thousand years, it
      would seem that the world was of yesterday; whereas our monuments prove a
      duration of many thousands of centuries. And for what reason are their
      books to be preferred to ours? Are then the Vedes, the Chastres, and the
      Pourans inferior to the Bibles, the Zendavestas, and the Zadders?* And is
      not the testimony of our fathers and our gods as valid as that of the
      fathers and the gods of the West? Ah! if it were permitted to reveal our
      mysteries to profane men! if a sacred veil did not justly conceal them
      from every eye!"
    

      These are the sacred volumes of the Hindoos; they are sometimes written
      Vedams, Pouranams, Chastrans, because the Hindoos, like the Persians, are
      accustomed to give a nasal sound to the terminations of their words, which
      we represent by the affixes on and an, and the Portuguese by the affixes
      om and am. Many of these books have been translated, thanks to the liberal
      spirit of Mr. Hastings, who has founded at Calcutta a literary society,
      and a printing press. At the same time, however, that we express our
      gratitude to this society, we must be permitted to complain of its
      exclusive spirit; the number of copies printed of each book being such as
      it is impossible to purchase them even in England; they are wholly in the
      hands of the East India proprietors. Scarcely even is the Asiatic
      Miscellany known in Europe; and a man must be very learned in oriental
      antiquity before he so much as hears of the Jones's, the Wilkins's, and
      the Halhed's, etc. As to the sacred books of the Hindoos, all that are yet
      in our hands are the Bhagvat Geeta, the Ezour-Vedam, the Bagavadam, and
      certain fragments of the Chastres printed at the end of the Bhagvat Geeta.
      These books are in Indostan what the Old and New Testament are in
      Christendom, the Koran in Turkey, the Zadder and the Zendavesta among the
      Parses, etc. When I have taken an extensive survey of their contents, I
      have sometimes asked myself, what would be the loss to the human race if a
      new Omar condemned them to the flames; and, unable to discover any
      mischief that would ensue, I call the imaginary chest that contains them,
      the box of Pandora.
    

      The Bramins stopping short at these words: "How can we admit your
      doctrine," said the legislator, "if you will not make it known? And how
      did its first authors propagate it, when, being alone possessed of it,
      their own people were to them profane? Did heaven reveal it to be kept a
      secret?"*
    

     * The Vedas or Vedams are the sacred volumes of the Hindoos,
     as the Bibles with us.  They are three in number; the Rick
     Veda, the Yadjour Veda, and the Sama Veda; they are so
     scarce in India, that the English could with great
     difficulty find an original one, of which a copy is
     deposited in the British Museum; they who reckon four Vedas,
     include among them the Attar Veda, concerning ceremonies,
     but which is lost.  There are besides commentaries named
     Upanishada, one of which was published by Anquetil du Peron,
     and entitled Oupnekhat, a curious work.  The date of these
     books is more than twenty-five centuries prior to our era;
     their contents prove that all the reveries of the Greek
     metaphysicians come from India and Egypt.  Since the year
     1788, the learned men of England are working in India a mine
     of literature totally unknown in Europe, and which proves
     that the civilization of India ascends to a very remote
     antiquity.  After the Vedas come the Chastras amounting to
     six.  They treat of theology and the Sciences. Afterwards
     eighteen Pouranas, treating of Mythology and History. See
     the Bahgouet-guita, the Baga Vadam, and the Ezour-Vedam,
     etc.


      But the Bramins persisting in their silence: "Let them have the honor of
      the secret," said a European: "Their doctrine is now divulged; we have
      their books, and I can give you the substance of them."
    

      Then beginning with an abstract of the four Vedes, the eighteen Pourans,
      and the five or six Chastres, he recounted how a being, infinite, eternal,
      immaterial and round, after having passed an eternity in
      self-contemplation, and determining at last to manifest himself, separated
      the male and female faculties which were in him, and performed an act of
      generation, of which the Lingam remains an emblem; how that first act gave
      birth to three divine powers, Brama, Bichen or Vichenou, and Chib or
      Chiven;* whose functions were—the first to create, the second to
      preserve, and the third to destroy, or change the form of the universe.
      Then, detailing the history of their operations and adventures, he
      explained how Brama, proud of having created the world and the eight
      bobouns, or spheres of probation, thought himself superior to Chib, his
      equal; how his pride brought on a battle between them, in which these
      celestial globes were crushed like a basket of eggs; how Brama, vanquished
      in this conflict, was reduced to serve as a pedestal to Chib,
      metamorphosed into a Lingam; how Vichenou, the god mediator, has taken at
      different times to preserve the world, nine mortal forms of animals; how
      first, in shape of a fish, he saved from the universal deluge a family who
      repeopled the earth; how afterwards, in the form of a tortoise,** he drew
      from the sea of milk the mountain Mandreguiri (the pole); then, becoming a
      boar, he tore the belly of the giant Ereuniachessen, who was drowning the
      earth in the abyss of Djole, from whence he drew it out with his tusks;
      how, becoming incarnate in a black shepherd, and under the name of
      Christ-en, he delivered the world of the enormous serpent Calengem, and
      then crushed his head, after having been wounded by him in the heel.
    

     * These names are differently pronounced according to the
     different dialects; thus they say Birmah, Bremma, Brouma.
     Bichen has been turned into Vichen by the easy exchange of a
     B for a V, and into Vichenou by means of a grammatical
     affix.  In the same manner Chib, which is synonymous with
     Satan, and signifies adversary, is frequently written Chiba
     and Chiv-en; he is called also Rouder and Routr-en, that is,
     the destroyer.

     ** This is the constellation testudo, or the lyre, which was
     at first a tortoise, on account of its slow motion round the
     Pole; then a lyre, because it is the shell of this reptile
     on which the strings of the lyre are mounted.  See an
     excellent memoir of M. Dupuis sur l'Origine des
     Constellations.


      Then, passing on to the history of the secondary Genii, he related how the
      Eternal, to display his own glory, created various orders of angels, whose
      business it was to sing his praises and to direct the universe; how a part
      of these angels revolted under the guidance of an ambitious chief, who
      strove to usurp the power of God, and to govern all; how God plunged them
      into a world of darkness, there to undergo the punishment for their
      crimes; how at last, touched with compassion, he consented to release
      them, to receive them into favor, after they should undergo a long series
      of probations; how, after creating for this purpose fifteen orbits or
      regions of planets, and peopling them with bodies, he ordered these rebel
      angels to undergo in them eighty-seven transmigrations; he then explained
      how souls, thus purified, returned to the first source, to the ocean of
      life and animation from which they had proceeded; and since all living
      creatures contain portions of this universal soul, he taught how criminal
      it was to deprive them of it. He was finally proceeding to explain the
      rites and ceremonies, when, speaking of offerings and libations of milk
      and butter made to gods of copper and wood, and then of purifications by
      the dung and urine of cows, there arose a universal murmur, mixed with
      peals of laughter, which interrupted the orator.
    

      Each of the different groups began to reason on that religion: "They are
      idolators," said the Mussulmans; "and should be exterminated." "They are
      deranged in their intellect," said the followers of Confucius; "we must
      try to cure them." "What ridiculous gods," said others, "are these
      puppets, besmeared with grease and smoke! Are gods to be washed like dirty
      children, from whom you must brush away the flies, which, attracted by
      honey, are fouling them with their excrements!"
    

      But a Bramin exclaimed with indignation: "These are profound mysteries,—emblems
      of truth, which you are not worthy to hear."
    

      "And in what respect are you more worthy than we?" exclaimed a Lama of
      Tibet. "Is it because you pretend to have issued from the head of Brama,
      and the rest of the human race from the less noble parts of his body? But
      to support the pride of your distinctions of origin and castes, prove to
      us in the first place that you are different from other men; establish, in
      the next place, as historical facts, the allegories which you relate; show
      us, indeed, that you are the authors of all this doctrine; for we will
      demonstrate, if necessary, that you have only stolen and disfigured it;
      that you are only the imitators of the ancient paganism of the West; to
      which, by an ill assorted mixture, you have allied the pure and spiritual
      doctrine of our gods—a doctrine totally detached from the senses,
      and entirely unknown on earth till Beddou taught it to the nations."*
    

     * All the ancient opinions of the Egyptian and Grecian
     theologians are to be found in India, and they appear to
     have been introduced, by means of the commerce of Arabia and
     the vicinity of Persia, time immemorial.


      A number of groups having asked what was this doctrine, and who was this
      god, of whom the greater part had never heard the name, the Lama resumed
      and said:
    

      "In the beginning, a sole-existent and self-existent God, having passed an
      eternity in the contemplation of his own being, resolved to manifest his
      perfections out of himself, and created the matter of the world. The four
      elements being produced, but still in a state of confusion, he breathed on
      the face of the waters, which swelled like an immense bubble in form of an
      egg, which unfolding, became the vault or orb of heaven, enclosing the
      world.* Having made the earth, and the bodies of animals, this God,
      essence of motion, imparted to them a part of his own being to animate
      them; for this reason, the soul of everything that breathes being a
      portion of the universal soul, no one of them can perish; they only change
      their form and mould in passing successively into different bodies. Of all
      these forms, the one most pleasing to God is that of man, as most
      resembling his own perfections. When a man, by an absolute disengagement
      from his senses, is wholly absorbed in self-contemplation, he then
      discovers the divinity, and becomes himself God. Of all the incarnations
      of this kind that God has hitherto taken, the greatest and most solemn was
      that in which he appeared thirty centuries ago in Kachemire, under the
      name of Fot or Beddou, to preach the doctrines of self-denial and
      self-annihilation."
    

     * This cosmogony of the Lamas, the Bonzes, and even the
     Bramins, as Henry Lord asserts, is literally that of the
     ancient Egyptians. The Egyptians, says Porphyry, call Kneph,
     intelligence, or efficient cause of the universe.  They
     relate that this God vomited an egg, from which was produced
     another God named Phtha or Vulcan, (igneous principle or the
     sun) and they add, that this egg is the world.  Euseb.
     Proep. Evang. p. 115.

     They represent, says the same author in another place, the
     God Kneph, or efficient cause, under the form of a man in
     deep blue (the color of the sky) having in his hand a
     sceptre, a belt round his body, and a small bonnet royal of
     light feathers on his head, to denote how very subtile and
     fugacious the idea of that being is. Upon which I shall
     observe that Kneph in Hebrew signifies a wing, a feather,
     and that this color of sky-blue is to be found in the
     majority of the Indian Gods, and is, under the name of
     Narayan, one of their most distinguishing epithets.


      Then, pursuing the history of Fot, the Lama continued:
    

      "He was born from the right flank of a virgin of royal blood, who did not
      cease to be a virgin for having become a mother; that the king of the
      country, uneasy at his birth, wished to destroy him, and for this purpose
      ordered a massacre of all the males born at that period, that being saved
      by shepherds, Beddou lived in the desert till the age of thirty years, at
      which time he began his mission to enlighten men and cast out devils; that
      he performed a multitude of the most astonishing miracles; that he spent
      his life in fasting and severe penitence, and at his death, bequeathed to
      his disciples a book containing his doctrines."
    

      And the Lama began to read:
    

      "He that leaveth his father and mother to follow me," says Fot, "becomes a
      perfect Samanean (a heavenly man).
    

      "He that practices my precepts to the fourth degree of perfection,
      acquires the faculty of flying in the air, of moving heaven and earth, of
      prolonging or shortening his life (rising from the dead).
    

      "The Samanean despises riches, and uses only what is strictly necessary;
      he mortifies his body, silences his passions, desires nothing, forms no
      attachments, meditates my doctrines without ceasing, endures injuries with
      patience, and bears no malice to his neighbor.
    

      "Heaven and earth shall perish," says Fot: "despise therefore your bodies,
      which are composed of the four perishable elements, and think only of your
      immortal soul.
    

      "Listen not to the flesh: fear and sorrow spring from the passions: stifle
      the passions and you destroy fear and sorrow.
    

      "Whoever dies without having embraced my religion," says Fot, "returns
      among men, until he embraces it."
    

      The Lama was going on with his reading, when the Christians interrupted
      him, crying out that this was their own religion adulterated—that
      Fot was no other than Jesus himself disfigured, and that the Lamas were
      the Nestorians and the Manicheans disguised and bastardized.*
    

     * This is asserted by our missionaries, and among others by
     Georgi in his unfinished work of the Thibetan alphabet: but
     if it can be proved that the Manicheans were but
     plagiarists, and the ignorant echo of a doctrine that
     existed fifteen hundred years before them, what becomes of
     the declarations of Georgi?  See upon this subject, Beausob.
     Hist. du Manicheisme.


      But the Lama, supported by the Chamans, Bonzes, Gonnis, Talapoins of Siam,
      of Ceylon, of Japan, and of China, proved to the Christians, even from
      their own authors, that the doctrine of the Samaneans was known through
      the East more than a thousand years before the Christian era; that their
      name was cited before the time of Alexander, and that Boutta, or Beddou,
      was known before Jesus.*
    

     * The eastern writers in general agree in placing the birth
     of Beddou 1027 years before Jesus Christ, which makes him
     the contemporary of Zoroaster, with whom, in my opinion,
     they confound him.  It is certain that his doctrine
     notoriously existed at that epoch; it is found entire in
     that of Orpheus, Pythagoras, and the Indian gymnosophists.
     But the gymnosophists are cited at the time of Alexander as
     an ancient sect already divided into Brachmans and
     Samaneans.  See Bardesanes en Saint Jerome, Epitre a Jovien.
     Pythagoras lived in the ninth century before Jesus Christ;
     See chronology of the twelve ages; and Orpheus is of still
     greater antiquity.  If, as is the case, the doctrine of
     Pythagoras and that of Orpheus are of Egyptian origin, that
     of Beddou goes back to the common source; and in reality the
     Egyptian priests recite, that Hermes as he was dying said:
     "I have hitherto lived an exile from my country, to which I
     now return.  Weep not for me, I ascend to the celestial
     abode where each of you will follow in his turn: there God
     is: this life is only death."—Chalcidius in Thinaeum.

     Such was the profession of faith of the Samaneans, the
     sectaries of Orpheus, and the Pythagoreans.  Farther, Hermes
     is no other than Beddou himself; for among the Indians,
     Chinese, Lamas, etc., the planet Mercury and the
     corresponding day of the week (Wednesday) bear the name of
     Beddou, and this accounts for his being placed in the rank
     of mythological beings, and discovers the illusion of his
     pretended existence as a man; since it is evident that
     Mercury was not a human being, but the Genius or Decan, who,
     placed at the summer solstice, opened the Egyptian year;
     hence his attributes taken from the constellation Syrius,
     and his name of Anubis, as well as that of Esculapius,
     having the figure of a man and the head of a dog: hence his
     serpent, which is the Hydra, emblem of the Nile (Hydor,
     humidity); and from this serpent he seems to have derived
     his name of Hermes, as Remes (with a schin) in the oriental
     languages, signifies serpent.  Now Beddou and Hermes being
     the same names, it is manifest of what antiquity is the
     system ascribed to the former.  As to the name of Samanean,
     it is precisely that of Chaman, still preserved in Tartary,
     China, and India.  The interpretation given to it is, man of
     the woods, a hermit mortifying the flesh, such being the
     characteristic of this sect; but its literal meaning is,
     celestial (Samaoui) and explains the system of those who are
     called by it.—The system is the same as that of the
     sectaries of Orpheus, of the Essenians, of the ancient
     Anchorets of Persia, and the whole eastern country.  See
     Porphyry, de Abstin. Animal.

     These celestial and penitent men carried in India their
     insanity to such an extreme as to wish not to touch the
     earth, and they accordingly lived in cages suspended from
     the trees, where the people, whose admiration was not less
     absurd, brought them provisions.  During the night there
     were frequent robberies, rapes and murders, and it was at
     length discovered that they were committed by those men,
     who, descending from their cages, thus indemnified
     themselves for their restraint during the day.  The Bramins,
     their rivals, embraced the opportunity of exterminating
     them; and from that time their name in India has been
     synonymous with hypocrite.  See Hist. de la Chine, in 5
     vols. quarto, at the note page 30; Hist. de Huns, 2 vols.
     and preface to the Ezour-Vedam.


      Then, retorting the pretensions of the Christians against themselves:
      "Prove to us," said the Lama, "that you are not Samaneans degenerated, and
      that the man you make the author of your sect is not Fot himself
      disguised. Prove to us by historical facts that he even existed at the
      epoch you pretend; for, it being destitute of authentic testimony,* we
      absolutely deny it; and we maintain that your very gospels are only the
      books of some Mithriacs of Persia, and the Essenians of Syria, who were a
      branch of reformed Samaneans."**
    

     * There are absolutely no other monuments of the existence
     of Jesus Christ as a human being, than a passage in Josephus
     (Antiq. Jud. lib. 18, c.3,) a single phrase in Tacitus
     (Annal. lib. 15, c. 44), and the Gospels.  But the passage
     in Josephus is unanimously acknowledged to be apocryphal,
     and to have been interpolated towards the close of the third
     century, (See Trad. de joseph, par M. Gillet); and that of
     Tacitus in so vague and so evidently taken from the
     deposition of the Christians before the tribunals, that it
     may be ranked in the class of evangelical records.  It
     remains to enquire of what authority are these records.
     "All the world knows," says Faustus, who, though a
     Manichean, was one of the most learned men of the third
     century, "All the world knows that the gospels were neither
     written by Jesus Christ, nor his apostles, but by certain
     unknown persons, who rightly judging that they should not
     obtain belief respecting things which they had not seen,
     placed at the head of their recitals the names of
     contemporary apostles." See Beausob. vol. i. and Hist. des
     Apologistes de la Relig. Chret. par Burigni, a sagacious
     writer, who has demonstrated the absolute uncertainty of
     those foundations of the Christian religion; so that the
     existence of Jesus is no better proved than that of Osiris
     and Hercules, or that of Fot or Beddou, with whom, says M.
     de Guignes, the Chinese continually confound him, for they
     never call Jesus by any other name than Fot.  Hist. de Huns.

     ** That is to say, from the pious romances formed out of the
     sacred legends of the mysteries of Mithra, Ceres, Isis,
     etc., from whence are equally derived the books of the
     Hindoos and the Bonzes.  Our missionaries have long remarked
     a striking resemblance between those books and the gospels.
     M. Wilkins expressly mentions it in a note in the Bhagvat
     Geeta.  All agree that Krisna, Fot, and Jesus have the same
     characteristic features: but religious prejudice has stood
     in the way of drawing from this circumstance the proper and
     natural inference.  To time and reason must it be left to
     display the truth.


      At these words, the Christians set up a general cry, and a new dispute was
      about to begin; when a number of Chinese Chamans, and Talapoins of Siam,
      came forward and said that they would settle the whole controversy. And
      one of them speaking for the whole exclaimed: "It is time to put an end to
      these frivolous contests by drawing aside the veil from the interior
      doctrine that Fot himself revealed to his disciples on his death bed.*
    

     * The Budsoists have two doctrines, the one public and
     ostensible, the other interior and secret, precisely like
     the Egyptian priests. It may be asked, why this distinction?
     It is, that as the public doctrine recommends offerings,
     expiations, endowments, etc., the priests find their profit
     in preaching it to the people; whereas the other, teaching
     the vanity of worldly things, and attended with no lucre, it
     is thought proper to make it known only to adepts. Can the
     teachers and followers of this religion be better classed
     than under the heads of knavery and credulity?


      "All these theological opinions," continued he, "are but chimeras. All the
      stories of the nature of the gods, of their actions and their lives, are
      but allegories and mythological emblems, under which are enveloped
      ingenious ideas of morals, and the knowledge of the operations of nature
      in the action of the elements and the movement of the planets.
    

      "The truth is, that all is reduced to nothing—that all is illusion,
      appearance, dream; that the moral metempsychosis is only the figurative
      sense of the physical metempsychosis, or the successive movement of the
      elements of bodies which perish not, but which, having composed one body,
      pass when that is dissolved, into other mediums and form other
      combinations. The soul is but the vital principle which results from the
      properties of matter, and from the action of the elements in those bodies
      where they create a spontaneous movement. To suppose that this product of
      the play of the organs, born with them, matured with them, and which
      sleeps with them, can subsist when they cease, is the romance of a
      wandering imagination, perhaps agreeable enough, but really chimerical.
    

      "God itself is nothing more than the moving principle, the occult force
      inherent in all beings—the sum of their laws and properties—the
      animating principle; in a word, the soul of the universe; which on account
      of the infinite variety of its connections and its operations, sometimes
      simple, sometimes multiple, sometimes active, sometimes passive, has
      always presented to the human mind an unsolvable enigma. All that man can
      comprehend with certainty is, that matter does not perish; that it
      possesses essentially those properties by which the world is held together
      like a living and organized being; that the knowledge of these laws with
      respect to man is what constitutes wisdom; that virtue and merit consist
      in their observance; and evil, sin, and vice, in the ignorance and
      violation of them; that happiness and misery result from these by the same
      necessity which makes heavy bodies descend and light ones rise, and by a
      fatality of causes and effects, whose chain extends from the smallest atom
      to the greatest of the heavenly bodies."*
    

     * These are the very expressions of La Loubre, in his
     description of the kingdom of Siam and the theology of the
     Bronzes.  Their dogmas, compared with those of the ancient
     philosophers of Greece and Italy, give a complete
     representation of the whole system of the Stoics and
     Epicureans, mixed with astrological superstitious, and some
     traits of Pythagorism.


      At these words, a crowd of theologians of every sect cried out that this
      doctrine was materialism, and that those who profess it were impious
      atheists, enemies to God and man, who must be exterminated. "Very well,"
      replied the Chamans, "suppose we are in error, which is not impossible,
      since the first attribute of the human mind is to be subject to illusion;
      but what right have you to take away from men like yourselves, the life
      which Heaven has given them? If Heaven holds us guilty and in abhorrence,
      why does it impart to us the same blessings as to you? And if it treats us
      with forbearance, what authority have you to be less indulgent? Pious men!
      who speak of God with so much certainty and confidence, be so good as to
      tell us what it is; give us to comprehend what those abstract and
      metaphysical beings are, which you call God and soul, substance without
      matter, existence without body, life without organs or sensation. If you
      know those beings by your senses or their reflections, render them in like
      manner perceptible to us; or if you speak of them on testimony and
      tradition, show us a uniform account, and give a determinate basis to our
      creed."
    

      There now arose among the theologians a great controversy respecting God
      and his nature, his manner of acting, and of manifesting himself; on the
      nature of the soul and its union with the body; whether it exists before
      the organs, or only after they are formed; on the future life, and the
      other world. And every sect, every school, every individual, differing on
      all these points, and each assigning plausible reasons, and respectable
      though opposite authorities for his opinion, they fell into an
      inextricable labyrinth of contradictions.
    

      Then the legislator, having commanded silence and recalled the dispute to
      its true object, said: "Chiefs and instructors of nations; you came
      together in search of truth. At first, every one of you, thinking he
      possessed it, demanded of the others an implicit faith; but perceiving the
      contrariety of your opinions, you found it necessary to submit them to a
      common rule of evidence, and to bring them to one general term of
      comparison; and you agreed that each should exhibit the proofs of his
      doctrine. You began by alleging facts; but each religion and every sect,
      being equally furnished with miracles and martyrs, each producing an equal
      number of witnesses, and offering to support them by a voluntary death,
      the balance on this first point, by right of parity, remained equal.
    

      "You then passed to the trial of reasoning; but the same arguments
      applying equally to contrary positions—the same assertions, equally
      gratuitous, being advanced and repelled with equal force, and all having
      an equal right to refuse his assent, nothing was demonstrated. What is
      more, the confrontation of your systems has brought up more and
      extraordinary difficulties; for amid the apparent or adventitious
      diversities, you have discovered a fundamental resemblance, a common
      groundwork; and each of you pretending to be the inventor, and first
      depositary, have taxed each other with adulterations and plagiarisms; and
      thence arises a difficult question concerning the transmission of
      religious ideas from people to people.
    

      "Finally, to complete your embarrassment: when you endeavored to explain
      your doctrines to each other, they appeared confused and foreign, even to
      their adherents; they were founded on ideas inaccessible to your senses;
      you consequently had no means of judging of them, and you confessed
      yourselves in this respect to be only the echoes of your fathers. Hence
      follows this other question: how came they to the knowledge of your
      fathers, who themselves had no other means than you to conceive them? So
      that, on the one hand, the succession of these ideas being unknown, and on
      the other, their origin and existence being a mystery, all the edifice of
      your religious opinions becomes a complicated problem of metaphysics and
      history.
    

      "Since, however, these opinions, extraordinary as they may be, must have
      had some origin; since even the most abstract and fantastical ideas have
      some physical model, it may be useful to recur to this origin, and
      discover this model—in a word, to find out from what source the
      human understanding has drawn these ideas, at present so obscure, of God,
      of the soul, of all immaterial beings, which make the basis of so many
      systems; to unfold the filiation which they have followed, and the
      alterations which they have undergone in their transmissions and
      ramifications. If, then, there are any persons present who have made a
      study of these objects, let them come forward, and endeavor, in the face
      of nations, to dissipate the obscurity in which their opinions have so
      long remained."
    


 



</div></body></text></TEI>