<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Ruins; Or, Meditation on the Revolutions of Empires</title><author>Volney, Constantin-François (1757-1820)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Joseph Johnson</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1791</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="12">
      CHAPTER XII.
    

      LESSONS OF TIMES PAST REPEATED ON THE PRESENT.
    

      Thus spoke the Genius. Struck with the justice and coherence of his
      discourse, assailed with a crowd of ideas, repugnant to my habits yet
      convincing to my reason, I remained absorbed in profound silence. At
      length, while with serious and pensive mien, I kept my eyes fixed on Asia,
      suddenly in the north, on the shores of the Black sea, and in the fields
      of the Crimea, clouds of smoke and flame attracted my attention. They
      appeared to rise at the same time from all parts of the peninsula; and
      passing by the isthmus into the continent, they ran, as if driven by a
      westerly wind, along the oozy lake of Azof, and disappeared in the grassy
      plains of Couban; and following more attentively the course of these
      clouds, I observed that they were preceded or followed by swarms of moving
      creatures, which, like ants or grasshoppers disturbed by the foot of a
      passenger, agitated themselves with vivacity. Sometimes these swarms
      appeared to advance and rush against each other; and numbers, after the
      concussion, remained motionless. While disquieted at this spectacle, I
      strained my sight to distinguish the objects.
    

      Do you see, said the Genius, those flames which spread over the earth, and
      do you comprehend their causes and effects?
    

      Oh! Genius, I answered, I see those columns of flame and smoke, and
      something like insects, accompanying them; but, when I can scarcely
      discern the great masses of cities and monuments, how should I discover,
      such little creatures? I can just perceive that these insects mimic
      battle, for they advance, retreat, attack and pursue.
    

      It is no mimicry, said the Genius, these are real battles.
    

      And what, said I, are those mad animalculae, which destroy each other?
      Beings of a day! will they not perish soon enough?
    

      Then the Genius, touching my sight and hearing, again directed my eyes
      towards the same object. Look, said he, and listen!
    

      Ah! wretches, cried I, oppressed with grief, these columns of flame! these
      insects! oh! Genius, they are men. These are the ravages of war! These
      torrents of flame rise from towns and villages! I see the squadrons who
      kindle them, and who, sword in hand overrun the country: they drive before
      them crowds of old men, women, and children, fugitive and desolate: I
      perceive other horsemen, who with shouldered lances, accompany and guide
      them. I even recognize them to be Tartars by their led horses,* their
      kalpacks, and tufts of hair: and, doubtless, they who pursue, in
      triangular hats and green uniforms, are Muscovites. Ah! I now comprehend,
      a war is kindled between the empire of the Czars and that of the Sultans.
    

     * A Tartar horseman has always two horses, of which he leads
     one in hand.  The Kalpeck is a bonnet made of the skin of a
     sheep or other animal.  The part of the head covered by this
     bonnet is shaved, with the exception of a tuft, about the
     size of a crown piece, and which is suffered to grow to the
     length of seven or eight inches, precisely where our priests
     place their tonsure.  It is by this tuft of hair, worn by
     the majority of Mussulmen, that the angel of the tomb is to
     take the elect and carry them into paradise.


      Not yet, replied the Genius; this is only a preliminary. These Tartars
      have been, and might still he troublesome neighbors. The Muscovites are
      driving them off, finding their country would be a convenient extension of
      their own limits; and as a prelude to another revolution, the throne of
      the Guerais is destroyed.
    

      And in fact, I saw the Russian standards floating over the Crimea: and
      soon after their flag waving on the Euxine.
    

      Meanwhile, at the cry of the flying Tartars, the Mussulman empire was in
      commotion. They are driving off our brethren, cried the children of
      Mahomet: the people of the prophet are outraged! infidels occupy a
      consecrated land and profane the temples of Islamism.* Let us arm; let us
      rush to combat, to avenge the glory of God and our own cause.
    

     * It is not in the power of the Sultan to cede to a foreign
     power a province inhabited by true believers.  The people,
     instigated by the lawyers, would not fail to revolt.  This
     is one reason which has led those who know the Turks, to
     regard as chimerical the ceding of Candia, Cyprus, and
     Egypt, projected by certain European potentates.


      And a general movement of war took place in both empires. In every part
      armed men assembled. Provisions, stores, and all the murderous apparatus
      of battle were displayed. The temples of both nations, besieged by an
      immense multitude, presented a spectacle which fixed all my attention.
    

      On one side, the Mussulmen gathered before their mosques, washed their
      hands and feet, pared their nails, and combed their beards; then spreading
      carpets upon the ground, and turning towards the south, with their arms
      sometimes crossed and sometimes extended, they made genuflexions and
      prostrations, and recollecting the disasters of the late war, they
      exclaimed:
    

      God of mercy and clemency! hast thou then abandoned thy faithful people?
      Thou who hast promised to thy Prophet dominion over nations, and stamped
      his religion by so many triumphs, dost thou deliver thy true believers to
      the swords of infidels?
    

      And the Imans and the Santons said to the people:
    

      It is in chastisement of your sins. You eat pork; you drink wine; you
      touch unclean things. God hath punished you. Do penance therefore; purify;
      repeat the profession of faith;* fast from the rising to the setting sun;
      give the tenth of your goods to the mosques; go to Mecca; and God will
      render you victorious.
    

     * There is but one God, and Mahomet is his prophet.


      And the people, recovering courage, uttered loud cries:
    

      There is but one God, said they transported with fury, and Mahomet is his
      prophet! Accursed be he who believeth not!
    

      God of goodness, grant us to exterminate these Christians; it is for thy
      glory we fight, and our death is a martyrdom for thy name. And then,
      offering victims, they prepared for battle.
    

      On the other side, the Russians, kneeling, said:
    

      We render thanks to God, and celebrate his power. He hath strengthened our
      arm to humble his enemies. Hear our prayers, thou God of mercy! To please
      thee, we will pass three days without eating either meat or eggs. Grant us
      to extirpate these impious Mahometans, and to overturn their empire. To
      thee we will consecrate the tenth of our spoil; to thee we will raise new
      temples.
    

      And the priests filled the churches with clouds of smoke, and said to the
      people:
    

      We pray for you, God accepteth our incense, and blesseth your arms.
      Continue to fast and to fight; confess to us your secret sins; give your
      wealth to the church; we will absolve you from your crimes, and you shall
      die in a state of grace.
    

      And they sprinkled water upon the people, dealt out to them, as amulets
      and charms, small relics of the dead, and the people breathed war and
      combat.
    

      Struck with this contrast of the same passions, and grieving for their
      fatal consequences, I was considering the difficulty with which the common
      judge could yield to prayers so contradictory; when the Genius, glowing
      with anger, spoke with vehemence:
    

      What accents of madness strike my ear? What blind and perverse delirium
      disorders the spirits of the nations? Sacrilegious prayers rise not from
      the earth! and you, oh Heavens, reject their homicidal vows and impious
      thanksgivings! Deluded mortals! is it thus you revere the Divinity? Say
      then; how should he, whom you style your common father, receive the homage
      of his children murdering one another? Ye victors! with what eye should he
      view your hands reeking in the blood he hath created? And, what do you
      expect, oh vanquished, from useless groans? Hath God the heart of a
      mortal, with passions ever changing? Is he, like you, agitated with
      vengeance or compassion, with wrath or repentance? What base conception of
      the most sublime of beings! According to them, it would seem, that God
      whimsical and capricious, is angered or appeased as a man: that he loves
      and hates alternately; that he punishes or favors; that, weak or wicked,
      he broods over his hatred; that, contradictory or perfidious, he lays
      snares to entrap; that he punishes the evils he permits; that he foresees
      but hinders not crimes; that, like a corrupt judge, he is bribed by
      offerings; like an ignorant despot, he makes laws and revokes them; that,
      like a savage tyrant, he grants or resumes favors without reason, and can
      only be appeased by servility. Ah! now I know the lying spirit of man!
      Contemplating the picture which he hath drawn of the Divinity: No, said I,
      it is not God who hath made man after the image of God; but man hath made
      God after the image of man; he hath given him his own mind, clothed him
      with his own propensities; ascribed to him his own judgments. And when in
      this medley he finds the contradiction of his own principles, with
      hypocritical humility, he imputes weakness to his reason, and names the
      absurdities of his own mind the mysteries of God.
    

      He hath said, God is immutable, yet he offers prayers to change him; he
      hath pronounced him incomprehensible, yet he interprets him without
      ceasing.
    

      Imposters have arisen on the earth who have called themselves the
      confidants of God; and, erecting themselves into teachers of the people,
      have opened the ways of falsehood and iniquity; they have ascribed merit
      to practices indifferent or ridiculous; they have supposed a virtue, in
      certain postures, in pronouncing certain words, articulating certain
      names; they have transformed into a crime the eating of certain meats, the
      drinking of certain liquors, on one day rather than another. The Jew would
      rather die than labor on the sabbath; the Persian would endure
      suffocation, before he would blow the fire with his breath; the Indian
      places supreme perfection in besmearing himself with cow-dung, and
      pronouncing mysteriously the word Aum;* the Mussulman believes he has
      expiated everything in washing his head and arms; and disputes, sword in
      hand, whether the ablution should commence at the elbow, or finger ends;**
      the Christian would think himself damned, if he ate flesh instead of milk
      or butter. Oh sublime doctrines! Doctrines truly from heaven! Oh perfect
      morals, and worthy of martyrdom or the apostolate! I will cross the seas
      to teach these admirable laws to the savage people—to distant
      nations; I will say unto them:
    

     * This word is, in the religion of the Hindoos, a sacred
     emblem of the Divinity.  It is only to be pronounced in
     secret, without being heard by any one.  It is formed of
     three letters, of which the first, a, signifies the
     principal of all, the creator, Brama; the second, u, the
     conservator, Vichenou; and the last, m, the destroyer, who
     puts an end to all, Chiven.  It is pronounced like the
     monosyllable om, and expresses the unity of those three
     Gods. The idea is precisely that of the Alpha and Omega
     mentioned in the New Testament.

     ** This is one of the grand points of schism between the
     partisans of Omar and those of Ali.  Suppose two Mahometans
     to meet on a journey, and to accost each other with
     brotherly affection: the hour of prayer arrives; one begins
     his ablution at his fingers, the other at the elbow, and
     instantly they are mortal enemies.  O sublime importance of
     religious opinions!  O profound philosophy of the authors of
     them!


      Children of nature, how long will you walk in the paths of ignorance? how
      long will you mistake the true principles of morality and religion? Come
      and learn its lessons from nations truly pious and learned, in civilized
      countries. They will inform you how, to gratify God, you must in certain
      months of the year, languish the whole day with hunger and thirst; how you
      may shed your neighbor's blood, and purify yourself from it by professions
      of faith and methodical ablutions; how you may steal his property and be
      absolved on sharing it with certain persons, who devote themselves to its
      consumption.
    

      Sovereign and invisible power of the universe! mysterious mover of nature!
      universal soul of beings! thou who art unknown, yet revered by mortals
      under so many names! being incomprehensible and infinite! God, who in the
      immensity of the heavens directest the movement of worlds, and peoplest
      the abyss of space with millions of suns! say what do these human insects,
      which my sight no longer discerns on the earth, appear in thy eyes? To
      thee, who art guiding stars in their orbits, what are those wormlings
      writhing themselves in the dust? Of what import to thy immensity, their
      distinctions of parties and sects? And of what concern the subtleties with
      which their folly torments itself?
    

      And you, credulous men, show me the effect of your practices! In so many
      centuries, during which you have been following or altering them, what
      changes have your prescriptions wrought in the laws of nature? Is the sun
      brighter? Is the course of the seasons varied? Is the earth more fruitful,
      or its inhabitants more happy? If God be good, can your penances please
      him? If infinite, can your homage add to his glory? If his decrees have
      been formed on foresight of every circumstance, can your prayers change
      them? Answer, O inconsistent mortals!
    

      Ye conquerors of the earth, who pretend you serve God! doth he need your
      aid? If he wishes to punish, hath he not earthquakes, volcanoes, and
      thunder? And cannot a merciful God correct without extermination?
    

      Ye Mussulmans, if God chastiseth you for violating the five precepts, how
      hath he raised up the Franks who ridicule them? If he governeth the earth
      by the Koran, by what did he govern it before the days of the prophet,
      when it was covered with so many nations who drank wine, ate pork, and
      went not to Mecca, whom he nevertheless permitted to raise powerful
      empires? How did he judge the Sabeans of Nineveh and of Babylon; the
      Persian, worshipper of fire; the Greek and Roman idolators; the ancient
      kingdoms of the Nile; and your own ancestors, the Arabians and Tartars?
      How doth he yet judge so many nations who deny, or know not your worship—the
      numerous castes of Indians, the vast empire of the Chinese, the sable race
      of Africa, the islanders of the ocean, the tribes of America?
    

      Presumptuous and ignorant men, who arrogate the earth to yourselves! if
      God were to gather all the generations past and present, what would be, in
      their ocean, the sects calling themselves universal, of Christians and
      Mussulmans? What would be the judgments of his equal and common justice
      over the real universality of mankind? Therein it is that your knowledge
      loseth itself in incoherent systems; it is there that truth shines with
      evidence; and there are manifested the powerful and simple laws of nature
      and reason—laws of a common and general mover—of a God
      impartial and just, who sheds rain on a country without asking who is its
      prophet; who causeth his sun to shine alike on all the races of men, on
      the white as on the black, on the Jew, on the Mussulman, the Christian,
      and the Idolater; who reareth the harvest wherever cultivated with
      diligence; who multiplieth every nation where industry and order
      prevaileth; who prospereth every empire where justice is practised, where
      the powerful are restrained, and the poor protected by the laws; where the
      weak live in safety, and all enjoy the rights given by nature and a
      compact formed in justice.
    

      These are the principles by which people are judged! this the true
      religion which regulates the destiny of empires, and which, O Ottomans,
      hath governed yours! Interrogate your ancestors, ask of them by what means
      they rose to greatness; when few, poor and idolaters, they came from the
      deserts of Tartary and encamped in these fertile countries; ask if it was
      by Islamism, till then unknown to them, that they conquered the Greeks and
      the Arabs, or was it by their courage, their prudence, moderation, spirit
      of union—the true powers of the social state? Then the Sultan
      himself dispensed justice, and maintained discipline. The prevaricating
      judge, the extortionate governor, were punished, and the multitude lived
      at ease. The cultivator was protected from the rapine of the janissary,
      and the fields prospered; the highways were safe, and commerce caused
      abundance. You were a band of plunderers, but just among yourselves. You
      subdued nations, but did not oppress them. Harassed by their own princes,
      they preferred being your tributaries. What matters it, said the
      Christian, whether my ruler breaks or adores images, if he renders justice
      to me? God will judge his doctrines in the heavens above.
    

      You were sober and hardy; your enemies timid and enervated; you were
      expert in battle, your enemies unskillful; your leaders were experienced,
      your soldiers warlike and disciplined. Booty excited ardor, bravery was
      rewarded, cowardice and insubordination punished, and all the springs of
      the human heart were in action. Thus you vanquished a hundred nations, and
      of a mass of conquered kingdoms compounded an immense empire.
    

      But other customs have succeeded; and in the reverses attending them, the
      laws of nature have still exerted their force. After devouring your
      enemies, your cupidity, still insatiable, has reacted on itself, and,
      concentrated in your own bowels, has consumed you.
    

      Having become rich, you have quarrelled for partition and enjoyment, and
      disorder hath arisen in every class of society.
    

      The Sultan, intoxicated with grandeur, has mistaken the object of his
      functions; and all the vices of arbitrary power have been developed.
      Meeting no obstacle to his appetites, he has become a depraved being; weak
      and arrogant, he has kept the people at a distance; and their voice has no
      longer instructed and guided him. Ignorant, yet flattered, neglecting all
      instruction, all study, he has fallen into imbecility; unfit for business,
      he has thrown its burdens on hirelings, and they have deceived him. To
      satisfy their own passions, they have stimulated and nourished his; they
      have multiplied his wants, and his enormous luxury has consumed
      everything. The frugal table, plain clothing, simple dwelling of his
      ancestors no longer sufficed. To supply his pomp, earth and sea have been
      exhausted. The rarest furs have been brought from the poles; the most
      costly tissues from the equator. He has devoured at a meal the tribute of
      a city, and in a day that of a province. He has surrounded himself with an
      army of women, eunuchs, and satellites. They have instilled into him that
      the virtue of kings is to be liberal, and the munificence and treasures of
      the people have been delivered into the hands of flatterers. In imitation
      of their master, his servants must also have splendid houses, the most
      exquisite furniture; carpets embroidered at great cost, vases of gold and
      silver for the lowest uses, and all the riches of the empire have been
      swallowed up in the Serai.
    

      To supply this inordinate luxury, the slaves and women have sold their
      influence, and venality has introduced a general depravation. The favor of
      the sovereign has been sold to his vizier, and the vizier has sold the
      empire. The law has been sold to the cadi, and the cadi has made sale of
      justice. The altar has been sold to the priest, and the priest has sold
      the kingdom of heaven. And gold obtaining everything, they have sacrificed
      everything to obtain gold. For gold, friend has betrayed friend, the child
      his parent, the servant his master, the wife her honor, the merchant his
      conscience; and good faith, morals, concord, and strength were banished
      from the state.
    

      The pacha, who had purchased the government of his province, farmed it out
      to others, who exercised every extortion. He sold in turn the collection
      of the taxes, the command of the troops, the administration of the
      villages; and as every employ has been transient, rapine, spread from rank
      to rank, has been greedy and implacable. The revenue officer has fleeced
      the merchant, and commerce was annihilated; the aga has plundered the
      husbandman, and culture has degenerated. The laborer, deprived of his
      stock, has been unable to sow; the tax was augmented, and he could not pay
      it; the bastinado has been threatened, and he has borrowed. Money, from
      want of security, being locked up from circulation, interest was therefore
      enormous, and the usury of the rich has aggravated the misery of the
      laborer.
    

      When excessive droughts and accidents of seasons have blasted the harvest,
      the government has admitted no delay, no indulgence for the tax; and
      distress bearing hard on the village, a part of its inhabitants have taken
      refuge in the cities; and their burdens falling on those who remained, has
      completed their ruin, and depopulated the country.
    

      If driven to extremity by tyranny and outrage, the villages have revolted,
      the pacha rejoices. He wages war on them, assails their homes, pillages
      their property, carries off their stock; and when the fields have become a
      desert, he exclaims:
    

      "What care I? I leave these fields to-morrow."
    

      The earth wanting laborers, the rain of heaven and overflowing of torrents
      have stagnated in marshes; and their putrid exhalations in a warm climate,
      have caused epidemics, plagues, and maladies of all sorts, whence have
      flowed additional suffering, penury, and ruin.
    

      Oh! who can enumerate all the calamities of tyrannical government?
    

      Sometimes the pachas declare war against each other, and for their
      personal quarrels the provinces of the same state are laid waste.
      Sometimes, fearing their masters, they attempt independence, and draw on
      their subjects the chastisement of their revolt. Sometimes dreading their
      subjects, they invite and subsidize strangers, and to insure their
      fidelity set no bounds to their depredations. Here they persecute the rich
      and despoil them under false pretences; there they suborn false witnesses,
      and impose penalties for suppositious offences; everywhere they excite the
      hatred of parties, encourage informations to obtain amercements, extort
      property, seize persons; and when their short-sighted avarice has
      accumulated into one mass all the riches of a country, the government, by
      an execrable perfidy, under pretence of avenging its oppressed people,
      takes to itself all their spoils, as if they were the culprits, and
      uselessly sheds the blood of its agents for a crime of which it is the
      accomplice.
    

      Oh wretches, monarchs or ministers, who sport with the lives and fortunes
      of the people! Is it you who gave breath to man, that you dare take it
      from him? Do you give growth to the plants of the earth, that you may
      waste them? Do you toil to furrow the field? Do you endure the ardor of
      the sun, and the torment of thirst, to reap the harvest or thrash the
      grain? Do you, like the shepherd, watch through the dews of the night? Do
      you traverse deserts, like the merchant? Ah! on beholding the pride and
      cruelty of the powerful, I have been transported with indignation, and
      have said in my wrath, will there never then arise on the earth men who
      will avenge the people and punish tyrants? A handful of brigands devour
      the multitude, and the multitude submits to be devoured! Oh! degenerate
      people! Know you not your rights? All authority is from you, all power is
      yours. Unlawfully do kings command you on the authority of God and of
      their lance—Soldiers be still; if God supports the Sultan he needs
      not your aid; if his sword suffices, he needs not yours; let us see what
      he can do alone. The soldiers grounded their arms; and behold these
      masters of the world, feeble as the meanest of their subjects! People!
      know that those who govern are your chiefs, not your masters; your agents,
      not your owners; that they have no authority over you, but by you, and for
      you; that your wealth is yours and they accountable for it; that, kings or
      subjects, God has made all men equal, and no mortal has the right to
      oppress his fellow-creatures.
    

      But this nation and its chiefs have mistaken these holy truths. They must
      abide then the consequences of their blindness. The decree is past; the
      day approaches when this colossus of power shall be crushed and crumbled
      under its own mass. Yes, I swear it, by the ruins of so many empires
      destroyed. The empire of the Crescent shall follow the fate of the
      despotism it has copied. A nation of strangers shall drive the Sultan from
      his metropolis. The throne of Orkhan shall be overturned. The last shoot
      of his trunk shall be broken off; and the horde of Oguzians,* deprived of
      their chief, shall disperse like that of the Nagois. In this dissolution,
      the people of the empire, loosened from the yoke which united them, shall
      resume their ancient distinctions, and a general anarchy shall follow, as
      happened in the empire of the Sophis;** until there shall arise among the
      Arabians, Armenians, or Greeks, legislators who may compose new states.
    

     * Before the Turks took the name of their chief, Othman I.,
     they bore that of Oguzians; and it was under this
     appellation that they were driven out of Tartary by Gengis,
     and came from the borders of Giboun to settle themselves in
     Anatolia.

     ** In Persia, after the death of Thamas-Koulikan, each
     province had its chief, and for forty years these chiefs
     were in a constant state of war.  In this view the Turks do
     not say without reason: "Ten years of a tyrant are less
     destructive than a single night of anarchy."


      Oh! if there were on earth men profound and bold! what elements for
      grandeur and glory! But the hour of destiny has already come; the cry of
      war strikes my ear; and the catastrophe begins. In vain the Sultan leads
      forth his armies; his ignorant warriors are beaten and dispersed. In vain
      he calls his subjects; their hearts are ice. Is it not written? say they,
      what matters who is our master? We cannot lose by the change.
    

      In vain the true believers invoke heaven and the prophet. The prophet is
      dead; and heaven without pity answers:
    

      Cease to invoke me. You have caused your own misfortunes; cure them
      yourselves. Nature has established laws; your part is to obey them.
      Observe, reason, and profit by experience. It is the folly of man which
      ruins him; let his wisdom save him. The people are ignorant; let them gain
      instruction. Their chiefs are wicked; let them correct and amend; for such
      is Nature's decree. Since the evils of society spring from cupidity and
      ignorance, men will never cease to be persecuted, till they become
      enlightened and wise; till they practise justice, founded on a knowledge
      of their relations and of the laws of their organization.*
    

     * A singular moral phenomenon made its appearance in Europe
     in the year 1788.  A great nation, jealous of its liberty,
     contracted a fondness for a nation the enemy of liberty; a
     nation friendly to the arts, for a nation that detests them;
     a mild and tolerant nation, for a persecuting and fanatic
     one; a social and gay nation, for a nation whose
     characteristics are gloom and misanthropy; in a word, the
     French were smitten with a passion for the Turks: they were
     desirous of engaging in a war for them, and that at a time
     when revolution in their own country was just at its
     commencement. A man, who perceived the true nature of the
     situation, wrote a book to dissuade them from the war: it
     was immediately pretended that he was paid by the
     government, which in reality wished the war, and which was
     upon the point of shutting him up in a state prison. Another
     man wrote to recommend the war: he was applauded, and his
     word taken for the science, the politeness, and importance
     of the Turks.  It is true that he believed in his own
     thesis, for he has found among them people who cast a
     nativity, and alchymists who ruined his fortune; as he found
     Martinists at Paris, who enabled him to sup with Sesostris,
     and Magnetizers who concluded with destroying his existence.
     Notwithstanding this, the Turks were beaten by the Russians,
     and the man who then predicted the fall of their empire,
     persists in the prediction.  The result of this fall will be
     a complete change of the political system, as far as it
     relates to the coast of the Mediterranean.  If, however, the
     French become important in proportion as they become free,
     and if they make use of the advantage they will obtain,
     their progress may easily prove of the most honorable sort;
     inasmuch as, by the wise decrees of fate, the true interest
     of mankind evermore accords with their true morality.



 



</div></body></text></TEI>