<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Ruins; Or, Meditation on the Revolutions of Empires</title><author>Volney, Constantin-François (1757-1820)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Joseph Johnson</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1791</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">
      CHAPTER XI.
    

      GENERAL CAUSES OF THE REVOLUTIONS AND RUIN OF ANCIENT STATES.
    

      Cupidity had nevertheless excited among men a constant and universal
      conflict, which incessantly prompting individuals and societies to
      reciprocal invasions, occasioned successive revolutions, and returning
      agitations.
    

      And first, in the savage and barbarous state of the first men, this
      audacious and fierce cupidity produced rapine, violence, and murder, and
      retarded for a long time the progress of civilization.
    

      When afterwards societies began to be formed, the effect of bad habits,
      communicated to laws and governments, corrupted their institutions and
      objects, and established arbitrary and factitious rights, which depraved
      the ideas of justice, and the morality of the people.
    

      Thus one man being stronger than another, their inequality—an
      accident of nature—was taken for her law;* and the strong being able
      to take the life of the weak, and yet sparing him, arrogated over his
      person an abusive right of property; and the slavery of individuals
      prepared the way for the slavery of nations.
    

      *Almost all the ancient philosophers and politicians have laid it down as
      a principle that men are born unequal, that nature his created some to be
      free, and others to be slaves. Expressions of this kind are to be found in
      Aristotle, and even in Plato, called the divine, doubtless in the same
      sense as the mythological reveries which he promulgated. With all the
      people of antiquity, the Gauls, the Romans, the Athenians, the right of
      the strongest was the right of nations; and from the same principle are
      derived all the political disorders and public national crimes that at
      present exist.
    

      Because the head of a family could be absolute in his house, he made his
      own affections and desires the rule of his conduct; he gave or resumed his
      goods without equality, without justice; and paternal despotism laid the
      foundation of despotism in government.*
    

     * Upon this single expression it would be easy to write a
     long and important chapter.  We might prove in it, beyond
     contradiction, that all the abuses of national governments,
     have sprung from those of domestic government, from that
     government called patriarchal, which superficial minds have
     extolled without having analyzed it. Numberless facts
     demonstrate, that with every infant people, in every savage
     and barbarous state, the father, the chief of the family, is
     a despot, and a cruel and insolent despot.  The wife is his
     slave, the children his servants.  This king sleeps or
     smokes his pipe, while his wife and daughters perform all
     the drudgery of the house, and even that of tillage and
     cultivation, as far as occupations of this nature are
     practised in such societies; and no sooner have the boys
     acquired strength then they are allowed to beat the females
     and make them serve and wait upon them as they do upon their
     fathers.  Similar to this is the state of our own
     uncivilized peasants.  In proportion as civilization
     spreads, the manners become milder, and the condition of the
     women improves, till, by a contrary excess, they arrive at
     dominion, and then a nation becomes effeminate and corrupt.
     It is remarkable that parental authority is great in
     proportion as the government is despotic.  China, India, and
     Turkey are striking examples of this. One would suppose that
     tyrants gave themselves accomplices and interested subaltern
     despots to maintain their authority.  In opposition to this
     the Romans will be cited, but it remains to be proved that
     the Romans were men truly free and their quick passage from
     their republican despotism to their abject servility under
     the emperors, gives room at least for considerable doubt as
     to that freedom.


      In societies formed on such foundations, when time and labor had developed
      riches, cupidity restrained by the laws, became more artful, but not less
      active. Under the mask of union and civil peace, it fomented in the bosom
      of every state an intestine war, in which the citizens, divided into
      contending corps of orders, classes, families, unremittingly struggled to
      appropriate to themselves, under the name of supreme power, the ability to
      plunder every thing, and render every thing subservient to the dictates of
      their passions; and this spirit of encroachment, disguised under all
      possible forms, but always the same in its object and motives, has never
      ceased to torment the nations.
    

      Sometimes, opposing itself to all social compact, or breaking that which
      already existed, it committed the inhabitants of a country to the
      tumultuous shock of all their discords; and states thus dissolved, and
      reduced to the condition of anarchy, were tormented by the passions of all
      their members.
    

      Sometimes a nation, jealous of its liberty, having appointed agents to
      administer its government, these agents appropriated the powers of which
      they had only the guardianship: they employed the public treasures in
      corrupting elections, gaining partisans, in dividing the people among
      themselves. By these means, from being temporary they became perpetual;
      from elective, hereditary; and the state, agitated by the intrigues of the
      ambitious, by largesses from the rich and factious, by the venality of the
      poor and idle, by the influence of orators, by the boldness of the wicked,
      and the weakness of the virtuous, was convulsed with all the
      inconveniences of democracy.
    

      The chiefs of some countries, equal in strength and mutually fearing each
      other, formed impious pacts, nefarious associations; and, apportioning
      among themselves all power, rank, and honor, unjustly arrogated privileges
      and immunities; erected themselves into separate orders and distinct
      classes; reduced the people to their control; and, under the name of
      aristocracy, the state was tormented by the passions of the wealthy and
      the great.
    

      Sacred impostors, in other countries, tending by other means to the same
      object, abused the credulity of the ignorant. In the gloom of their
      temples, behind the curtain of the altar, they made their gods act and
      speak; gave forth oracles, worked miracles, ordered sacrifices, levied
      offerings, prescribed endowments; and, under the names of theocracy and of
      religion, the state became tormented by the passions of the priests.
    

      Sometimes a nation, weary of its dissensions or of its tyrants, to lessen
      the sources of evil, submitted to a single master; but if it limited his
      powers, his sole aim was to enlarge them; if it left them indefinite, he
      abused the trust confided to him; and, under the name of monarchy, the
      state was tormented by the passions of kings and princes.
    

      Then the factions, availing themselves of the general discontent,
      flattered the people with the hope of a better master; dealt out gifts and
      promises, deposed the despot to take his place; and their contests for the
      succession, or its partition, tormented the state with the disorders and
      devastations of civil war.
    

      In fine, among these rivals, one more adroit, or more fortunate, gained
      the ascendency, and concentrated all power within himself. By a strange
      phenomenon, a single individual mastered millions of his equals, against
      their will and without their consent; and the art of tyranny sprung also
      from cupidity.
    

      In fact, observing the spirit of egotism which incessantly divides
      mankind, the ambitious man fomented it with dexterity, flattered the
      vanity of one, excited the jealousy of another, favored the avarice of
      this, inflamed the resentment of that, and irritated the passions of all;
      then, placing in opposition their interests and prejudices, he sowed
      divisions and hatreds, promised to the poor the spoils of the rich, to the
      rich the subjection of the poor; threatened one man by another, this class
      by that; and insulating all by distrust, created his strength out of their
      weakness, and imposed the yoke of opinion, which they mutually riveted on
      each other. With the army he levied contributions, and with contributions
      he disposed of the army: dealing out wealth and office on these
      principles, he enchained a whole people in indissoluble bonds, and they
      languished under the slow consumption of despotism.
    

      Thus the same principle, varying its action under every possible form, was
      forever attenuating the consistence of states, and an eternal circle of
      vicissitudes flowed from an eternal circle of passions.
    

      And this spirit of egotism and usurpation produced two effects equally
      operative and fatal: the one a division and subdivision of societies into
      their smallest fractions, inducing a debility which facilitated their
      dissolution; the other, a preserving tendency to concentrate power in a
      single hand,* which, engulfing successively societies and states, was
      fatal to their peace and social existence.
    

     * It is remarkable that this has in all instances been the
     constant progress of societies; beginning with a state of
     anarchy or democracy, that is, with a great division of
     power they have passed to aristocracy, and from aristocracy
     to monarchy.  Does it not hence follow that those who
     constitute states under the democratic form, destine them to
     undergo all the intervening troubles between that and
     monarchy; but it should at the same time be proved that
     social experience is already exhausted for the human race,
     and that this spontaneous movement is not solely the effect
     of ignorance.


      Thus, as in a state, a party absorbed the nation, a family the party, and
      an individual the family; so a movement of absorption took place between
      state and state, and exhibited on a larger scale in the political order,
      all the particular evils of the civil order. Thus a state having subdued a
      state, held it in subjection in the form of a province; and two provinces
      being joined together formed a kingdom; two kingdoms being united by
      conquest, gave birth to empires of gigantic size; and in this
      conglomeration, the internal strength of states, instead of increasing,
      diminished; and the condition of the people, instead of ameliorating,
      became daily more abject and wretched, for causes derived from the nature
      of things.
    

      Because, in proportion as states increased in extent, their administration
      becoming more difficult and complicated, greater energies of power were
      necessary to move such masses; and there was no longer any proportion
      between the duties of sovereigns and their ability to perform their
      duties:
    

      Because despots, feeling their weakness, feared whatever might develop the
      strength of nations, and studied only how to enfeeble them:
    

      Because nations, divided by the prejudices of ignorance and hatred,
      seconded the wickedness of their governments; and availing themselves
      reciprocally of subordinate agents, aggravated their mutual slavery:
    

      Because, the balance between states being destroyed, the strong more
      easily oppressed the weak.
    

      Finally, because in proportion as states were concentrated, the people,
      despoiled of their laws, of their usages, and of the government of their
      choice, lost that spirit of personal identification with their government,
      which had caused their energy.
    

      And despots, considering empires as their private domains and the people
      as their property, gave themselves up to depredations, and to all the
      licentiousness of the most arbitrary authority.
    

      And all the strength and wealth of nations were diverted to private
      expense and personal caprice; and kings, fatigued with gratification,
      abandoned themselves to all the extravagancies of factitious and depraved
      taste.* They must have gardens mounted on arcades, rivers raised over
      mountains, fertile fields converted into haunts for wild beasts; lakes
      scooped in dry lands, rocks erected in lakes, palaces built of marble and
      porphyry, furniture of gold and diamonds. Under the cloak of religion,
      their pride founded temples, endowed indolent priests, built, for vain
      skeletons, extravagant tombs, mausoleums and pyramids;** millions of hands
      were employed in sterile labors; and the luxury of princes, imitated by
      their parasites, and transmitted from grade to grade to the lowest ranks,
      became a general source of corruption and impoverishment.
    

     * It is equally worthy of remark, that the conduct and
     manners of princes and kings of every country and every age,
     are found to be precisely the same at similar periods,
     whether of the formation or dissolution of empires.  History
     every where presents the same pictures of luxury and folly;
     of parks, gardens, lakes, rocks, palaces, furniture, excess
     of the table, wine, women, concluding with brutality.

     The absurd rock in the garden of Versailles has alone cost
     three millions.  I have sometimes calculated what might have
     been done with the expense of the three pyramids of Gizah,
     and I have found that it would easily have constructed from
     the Red Sea to Alexandria, a canal one hundred and fifty
     feet wide and thirty deep, completely covered in with cut
     stones and a parapet, together with a fortified and
     commercial town, consisting of four hundred houses,
     furnished with cisterns.  What a difference in point of
     utility between such a canal and these pyramids!

     ** The learned Dupuis could not be persuaded that the
     pyramids were tombs; but besides the positive testimony of
     historians, read what Diodorus says of the religious and
     superstitious importance every Egyptian attached to building
     his dwelling eternal, b. 1.

     During twenty years, says Herodotus, a hundred thousand men
     labored every day to build the pyramid of the Egyptian
     Cheops.  Supposing only three hundred days a year, on
     account of the sabbath, there will be 30 millions of days'
     work in a year, and 600 millions in twenty years; at 15 sous
     a day, this makes 450 millions of francs lost, without any
     further benefit.  With this sum, if the king had shut the
     isthmus of Suez by a strong wall, like that of China, the
     destinies of Egypt might have been entirely changed.
     Foreign invasions would have been prevented, and the Arabs
     of the desert would neither have conquered nor harassed that
     country.  Sterile labors! how many millions lost in putting
     one stone upon another, under the forms of temples and
     churches!  Alchymists convert stones into gold; but
     architects change gold into stone.  Woe to the kings (as
     well as subjects) who trust their purse to these two classes
     of empirics!


      And in the insatiable thirst of enjoyment, the ordinary revenues no longer
      sufficing, they were augmented; the cultivator, seeing his labors increase
      without compensation, lost all courage; the merchant, despoiled, was
      disgusted with industry; the multitude, condemned to perpetual poverty,
      restrained their labor to simple necessaries; and all productive industry
      vanished.
    

      The surcharge of taxes rendering lands a burdensome possession, the poor
      proprietor abandoned his field, or sold it to the powerful; and fortune
      became concentrated in a few hands. All the laws and institutions favoring
      this accumulation, the nation became divided into a group of wealthy
      drones, and a multitude of mercenary poor; the people were degraded with
      indigence, the great with satiety, and the number of those interested in
      the preservation of the state decreasing, its strength and existence
      became proportionally precarious.
    

      On the other hand, emulation finding no object, science no encouragement,
      the mind sunk into profound ignorance.
    

      The administration being secret and mysterious, there existed no means of
      reform or amelioration. The chiefs governing by force or fraud, the people
      viewed them as a faction of public enemies; and all harmony ceased between
      the governors and governed.
    

      And these vices having enervated the states of the wealthy part of Asia,
      the vagrant and indigent people of the adjacent deserts and mountains
      coveted the enjoyments of the fertile plains; and, urged by a cupidity
      common to all, attacked the polished empires, and overturned the thrones
      of their despots. These revolutions were rapid and easy; because the
      policy of tyrants had enfeebled the subjects, razed the fortresses,
      destroyed the warriors; and because the oppressed subjects remained
      without personal interest, and the mercenary soldiers without courage.
    

      And hordes of barbarians having reduced entire nations to slavery, the
      empires, formed of conquerors and conquered, united in their bosom two
      classes essentially opposite and hostile. All the principles of society
      were dissolved: there was no longer any common interest, no longer any
      public spirit; and there arose a distinction of casts and races, which
      reduced to a regular system the maintenance of disorder; and he who was
      born of this or that blood, was born a slave or a tyrant—property or
      proprietor.
    

      The oppressors being less numerous than the oppressed it was necessary to
      perfect the science of oppression, in order to support this false
      equilibrium. The art of governing became the art of subjecting the many to
      the few. To enforce an obedience so contrary to instinct, the severest
      punishments were established, and the cruelty of the laws rendered manners
      atrocious. The distinction of persons establishing in the state two codes,
      two orders of criminal justice, two sets of laws, the people, placed
      between the propensities of the heart and the oath uttered from the mouth,
      had two consciences in contradiction with each other; and the ideas of
      justice and injustice had no longer any foundation in the understanding.
    

      Under such a system, the people fell into dejection and despair; and the
      accidents of nature were added to the other evils which assailed them.
      Prostrated by so many calamities, they attributed their causes to superior
      and hidden powers; and, because they had tyrants on earth, they fancied
      others in heaven; and superstition aggravated the misfortunes of nations.
    

      Fatal doctrines and gloomy and misanthropic systems of religion arose,
      which painted their gods, like their despots, wicked and envious. To
      appease them, man offered up the sacrifice of all his enjoyments. He
      environed himself in privations, and reversed the order of nature.
      Conceiving his pleasures to be crimes, his sufferings expiations, he
      endeavored to love pain, and to abjure the love of self. He persecuted his
      senses, hated his life; and a self-denying and anti-social morality
      plunged nations into the apathy of death.
    

      But provident nature having endowed the heart of man with hope
      inexhaustible, when his desires of happiness were baffled on this earth,
      he pursued it into another world. By a sweet illusion he created for
      himself another country—an asylum where, far from tyrants, he should
      recover the rights of nature, and thence resulted new disorders. Smitten
      with an imaginary world, man despised that of nature. For chimerical
      hopes, he neglected realities. His life began to appear a troublesome
      journey—a painful dream; his body a prison, the obstacle to his
      felicity; and the earth, a place of exile and of pilgrimage, not worthy of
      culture. Then a holy indolence spread over the political world; the fields
      were deserted, empires depopulated, monuments neglected and deserts
      multiplied; ignorance, superstition and fanaticism, combining their
      operations, overwhelmed the earth with devastation and ruin.
    

      Thus agitated by their own passions, men, whether collectively or
      individually taken, always greedy and improvident, passing from slavery to
      tyranny, from pride to baseness, from presumption to despondency, have
      made themselves the perpetual instruments of their own misfortunes.
    

      These, then, are the principles, simple and natural, which regulated the
      destiny of ancient states. By this regular and connected series of causes
      and effects, they rose or fell, in proportion as the physical laws of the
      human heart were respected or violated; and in the course of their
      successive changes, a hundred different nations, a hundred different
      empires, by turns humbled, elevated, conquered, overthrown, have repeated
      for the earth their instructive lessons. Yet these lessons were lost for
      the generations which have followed! The disorders in times past have
      reappeared in the present age! The chiefs of the nations have continued to
      walk in the paths of falsehood and tyranny!—the people to wander in
      the darkness of superstition and ignorance!
    

      Since then, continued the Genius, with renewed energy, since the
      experience of past ages is lost for the living—since the errors of
      progenitors have not instructed their descendants, the ancient examples
      are about to reappear; the earth will see renewed the tremendous scenes it
      has forgotten. New revolutions will agitate nations and empires; powerful
      thrones will again be overturned, and terrible catastrophes will again
      teach mankind that the laws of nature and the precepts of wisdom and truth
      cannot be infringed with impunity.
    


 



</div></body></text></TEI>