<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Ruins; Or, Meditation on the Revolutions of Empires</title><author>Volney, Constantin-François (1757-1820)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Joseph Johnson</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1791</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="24">
      CHAPTER XXIV.
    

      SOLUTION OF THE PROBLEM OF CONTRADICTIONS.
    

      The legislator then resumed his discourse: "O nations!" said he, "we have
      heard the discussion of your opinions. The different sentiments which
      divide you have given rise to many reflections, and furnished several
      questions which we shall propose to you to solve.
    

      "First, considering the diversity and opposition of the creeds to which
      you are attached, we ask on what motives you found your persuasion? Is it
      from a deliberate choice that you follow the standard of one prophet
      rather than another? Before adopting this doctrine, rather than that, did
      you first compare? did you carefully examine them? Or have you received
      them only from the chance of birth, from the empire of education and
      habit? Are you not born Christians on the borders of the Tiber, Mussulmans
      on those of the Euphrates, Idolaters on the Indus, just as you are born
      fair in cold climates, and sable under the scorching sun of Africa? And if
      your opinions are the effect of your fortuitous position on the earth, of
      consanguinity, of imitation, how is it that such a hazard should be a
      ground of conviction, an argument of truth?
    

      "Secondly, when we reflect on the mutual proscriptions and arbitrary
      intolerance of your pretensions, we are frightened at the consequences
      that flow from your own principles. Nations! who reciprocally devote each
      other to the bolts of heavenly wrath, suppose that the universal Being,
      whom you revere, should this moment descend from heaven on this multitude;
      and, clothed with all his power, should sit on this throne to judge you;
      suppose that he should say to you: Mortals! it is your own justice that I
      am going to exercise upon you. Yes, of all the religious systems that
      divide you, one alone shall this day be preferred; all the others, all
      this multitude of standards, of nations, of prophets, shall be condemned
      to eternal destruction. This is not enough: among the particular sects of
      the chosen system, one only can be favored; all the others must be
      condemned: neither is this enough;—from this little remnant of a
      group I must exclude all those who have not fulfilled the conditions
      enjoined by its precepts. O men! to what a small number of elect have you
      limited your race! to what a penury of beneficence do you reduce the
      immensity of my goodness! to what a solitude of beholders do you condemn
      my greatness and my glory!
    

      "But," said the legislator rising, "no matter you have willed it so.
      Nations! here is an urn in which all your names are placed: one only is a
      prize: approach, and draw this tremendous lottery!" And the nations,
      seized with terror cried: "No, no; we are all brothers, all equal; we
      cannot condemn each other."
    

      "Then," said the legislator, resuming his seat: "O men! who dispute on so
      many subjects, lend an attentive ear to one problem which you exhibit, and
      which you ought to decide yourselves."
    

      And the people, giving great attention, he lifted an arm towards heaven,
      and, pointing to the sun, said:
    

      "Nations, does that sun, which enlightens you, appear square or
      triangular?"
    

      "No," answered they with one voice, "it is round."
    

      Then, taking the golden balance that was on the altar:
    

      "This gold," said the legislator, "that you handle every day, is it
      heavier than the same volume of copper?"
    

      "Yes," answered all the people, "gold is heavier than Copper."
    

      Then, taking the sword:
    

      "Is this iron," said the legislator, "softer than lead?"
    

      "No," said the people.
    

      "Is sugar sweet, and gall bitter?"
    

      "Yes."
    

      "Do you love pleasure and hate pain?"
    

      "Yes."
    

      "Thus, then, you are agreed in these points, and many others of the same
      nature.
    

      "Now, tell us, is there a cavern in the centre of the earth, or
      inhabitants in the moon?"
    

      This question caused a universal murmur. Every one answered differently—some
      yes, others no; one said it was probable, another said it was an idle and
      ridiculous question; some, that it was worth knowing. And the discord was
      universal.
    

      After some time the legislator, having obtained silence, said:
    

      "Explain to us, O Nations! this problem: we have put to you several
      questions which you have answered with one voice, without distinction of
      race or of sect: white men, black men, followers of Mahomet and of Moses,
      worshippers of Boudha and of Jesus, all have returned the same answer. We
      then proposed another question, and you have all disagreed! Why this
      unanimity in one case, and this discordance in the other?"
    

      And the group of simple men and savages answered and said: "The reason of
      this is plain. In the first case we see and feel the objects, and we speak
      from sensation; in the second, they are beyond the reach of our senses—we
      speak of them only from conjecture."
    

      "You have resolved the problem," said the legislator; "and your own
      consent has established this first truth:
    

      "That whenever objects can be examined and judged of by your senses, you
      are agreed in opinion; and that you only differ when the objects are
      absent and beyond your reach.
    

      "From this first truth flows another equally clear and worthy of notice.
      Since you agree on things which you know with certainty, it follows that
      you disagree only on those which you know not with certainty, and about
      which you are not sure; that is to say, you dispute, you quarrel, you
      fight, for that which is uncertain, that of which you doubt. O men! is
      this wisdom?
    

      "Is it not, then, demonstrated that truth is not the object of your
      contests? that it is not her cause which you defend, but that of your
      affections, and your prejudices? that it is not the object, as it really
      is in itself, that you would verify, but the object as you would have it;
      that is to say, it is not the evidence of the thing that you would
      enforce, but your own personal opinion, your particular manner of seeing
      and judging? It is a power that you wish to exercise, an interest that you
      wish to satisfy, a prerogative that you arrogate to yourself; it is a
      contest of vanity. Now, as each of you, on comparing himself to every
      other, finds himself his equal and his fellow, he resists by a feeling of
      the same right. And your disputes, your combats, your intolerance, are the
      effect of this right which you deny each other, and of the intimate
      conviction of your equality.
    

      "Now, the only means of establishing harmony is to return to nature, and
      to take for a guide and regulator the order of things which she has
      founded; and then your accord will prove this other truth:
    

      "That real beings have in themselves an identical, constant and uniform
      mode of existence; and that there is in your organs a like mode of being
      affected by them.
    

      "But at the same time, by reason of the mobility of these organs as
      subject to your will, you may conceive different affections, and find
      yourselves in different relations with the same objects; so that you are
      to them like a mirror, capable of reflecting them truly as they are, or of
      distorting and disfiguring them.
    

      "Hence it follows, that whenever you perceive objects as they are, you
      agree among yourselves, and with the objects; and this similitude between
      your sensations and their manner of existence, is what constitutes their
      truth with respect to you; and, on the contrary, whenever you differ in
      opinion, your disagreement is a proof that you do not represent them such
      as they are,—that you change them.
    

      "Hence, also, it follows, that the causes of your disagreement exist not
      in the objects themselves, but in your minds, in your manner of perceiving
      or judging.
    

      "To establish, therefore, a uniformity of opinion, it is necessary first
      to establish the certainty, completely verified, that the portraits which
      the mind forms are perfectly like the originals; that it reflects the
      objects correctly as they exist. Now, this result cannot be obtained but
      in those cases where the objects can be brought to the test, and submitted
      to the examination of the senses. Everything which cannot be brought to
      this trial is, for that reason alone, impossible to be determined; there
      exists no rule, no term of comparison, no means of certainty, respecting
      it.
    

      "From this we conclude, that, to live in harmony and peace, we must agree
      never to decide on such subjects, and to attach to them no importance; in
      a word, we must trace a line of distinction between those that are capable
      of verification, and those that are not; and separate by an inviolable
      barrier the world of fantastical beings from the world of realities; that
      is to say, all civil effect must be taken away from theological and
      religious opinions.
    

      "This, O ye people of the earth! is the object proposed by a great nation
      freed from her fetters and her prejudices; this is the work which, under
      her eye and by her orders, we had undertaken, when your kings and your
      priests came to interrupt it. O kings and priests! you may suspend, yet
      for a while, the solemn publication of the laws of nature; but it is no
      longer in your power to annihilate or to subvert them."
    

      A general shout then arose from every part of the assembly; and the
      nations universally, and with one voice, testified their assent to the
      proposals of the delegates: "Resume," said they, "your holy and sublime
      labors, and bring them to perfection. Investigate the laws which nature,
      for our guidance, has implanted in our breasts, and collect from them an
      authentic and immutable code; nor let this code be any longer for one
      family only, but for us all without exception. Be the legislators of the
      whole human race, as you are the interpreters of nature herself. Show us
      the line of partition between the world of chimeras and that of realities;
      and teach us, after so many religions of error and delusion, the religion
      of evidence and truth!"
    

      Then the delegates, having resumed their enquiries into the physical and
      constituent attributes of man, and examined the motives and affections
      which govern him in his individual and social state, unfolded in these
      words the laws on which nature herself has founded his happiness.
    

    


      THE LAW OF NATURE.
    


 



</div></body></text></TEI>