<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="24">CHAPTER XI.
For my own part, I had never seen a prison, and, like the majority of my
  brethren, had given myself little concern to enquire what was the condition
  of those who committed offence against, or became obnoxious to suspicion
  from, the community. Oh, how enviable is the most tottering shed under which
  the labourer retires to rest, compared with the residence of these
  walls!
To me every thing was new,—the massy doors, the resounding locks,
  the gloomy passages, the grated windows, and the characteristic looks of the
  keepers, accustomed to reject every petition, and to steel their hearts
  against feeling and pity. Curiosity, and a sense of my situation, induced me
  to fix my eyes on the faces of these men; but in a few minutes I drew them
  away with unconquerable loathing. It is impossible to describe the sort of
  squalidness and filth with which these mansions are distinguished. I have
  seen dirty faces in dirty apartments, which have nevertheless borne the
  impression of health, and spoke carelessness and levity rather than
  distress. But the dirt of a prison speaks sadness to the heart, and appears
  to be already in a state of putridity and infection.
I was detained for more than an hour in the apartment of the keeper, one
  turnkey after another coming in, that they might make themselves familiar
  with my person. As I was already considered as guilty of felony to a
  considerable amount, I underwent a rigorous search, and they took from me a
  penknife, a pair of scissars, and that part of my money which was in gold.
  It was debated whether or not these should be sealed up, to be returned to
  me, as they said, as soon as I should be acquitted; and had I not displayed
  an unexpected firmness of manner and vigour of expostulation, such was
  probably the conduct that would have been pursued. Having undergone these
  ceremonies, I was thrust into a day-room, in which all the persons then
  under confinement for felony were assembled, to the number of eleven. Each
  of them was too much engaged in his own reflections, to take notice of me.
  Of these, two were imprisoned for horse-stealing, and three for having
  stolen a sheep, one for shop-lifting, one for coining, two for
  highway-robbery, and two for burglary.
The horse-stealers were engaged in a game at cards, which was presently
  interrupted by a difference of opinion, attended with great
  vociferation,—they calling upon one and another to decide it, to no
  purpose; one paying no attention to their summons, and another leaving them
  in the midst of their story, being no longer able to endure his own internal
  anguish, in the midst of their mummery.
It is a custom among thieves to constitute a sort of mock tribunal of
  their own body, from whose decision every one is informed whether he shall
  be acquitted, respited, or pardoned, as well as respecting the supposed most
  skilful way of conducting his defence. One of the housebreakers, who had
  already passed this ordeal, and was stalking up and down the room with a
  forced bravery, exclaimed to his companion, that he was as rich as the Duke
  of Bedford himself. He had five guineas and a half, which was as much as he
  could possibly spend in the course of the ensuing month; and what happened
  after that, it was Jack Ketch's business to see to, not his. As he uttered
  these words, he threw himself abruptly upon a bench that was near him, and
  seemed to be asleep in a moment. But his sleep was uneasy and disturbed, his
  breathing was hard, and, at intervals, had rather the nature of a groan. A
  young fellow from the other side of the room came softly to the place where
  he lay, with a large knife in his hand: and pressed the back of it with such
  violence upon his neck, the head hanging over the side of the bench, that it
  was not till after several efforts that he was able to rise. "Oh, Jack!"
  cried this manual jester, "I had almost done your business for you!" The
  other expressed no marks of resentment, but sullenly answered, "Damn you,
  why did not you take the edge? It would have been the best thing you have
  done this many a day!"2
The case of one of the persons committed for highway-robbery was not a
  little extraordinary. He was a common soldier of a most engaging
  physiognomy, and two-and-twenty years of age. The prosecutor, who had been
  robbed one evening, as he returned late from the alehouse, of the sum of
  three shillings, swore positively to his person. The character of the
  prisoner was such as has seldom been equalled. He had been ardent in the
  pursuit of intellectual cultivation, and was accustomed to draw his
  favourite amusement from the works of Virgil and Horace. The humbleness of
  his situation, combined with his ardour for literature, only served to give
  an inexpressible heightening to the interestingness of his character. He was
  plain and unaffected; he assumed nothing; he was capable, when occasion
  demanded, of firmness, but, in his ordinary deportment, he seemed unarmed
  and unresisting, unsuspicious of guile in others, as he was totally free
  from guile in himself. His integrity was proverbially great. In one instance
  he had been intrusted by a lady to convey a sum of a thousand pounds to a
  person at some miles distance: in another, he was employed by a gentleman,
  during his absence, in the care of his house and furniture, to the value of
  at least five times that sum. His habits of thinking were strictly his own,
  full of justice, simplicity, and wisdom. He from time to time earned money
  of his officers, by his peculiar excellence in furbishing arms; but he
  declined offers that had been made him to become a Serjeant or a corporal,
  saying that he did not want money, and that in a new situation he should
  have less leisure for study. He was equally constant in refusing presents
  that were offered him by persons who had been struck with his merit; not
  that he was under the influence of false delicacy and pride, but that he had
  no inclination to accept that, the want of which he did not feel to be an
  evil. This man died while I was in prison. I received his last
  breath.3
The whole day I was obliged to spend in the company of these men, some of
  them having really committed the actions laid to their charge, others whom
  their ill fortune had rendered the victims of suspicion. The whole was a
  scene of misery, such as nothing short of actual observation can suggest to
  the mind. Some were noisy and obstreperous, endeavouring by a false bravery
  to keep at bay the remembrance of their condition; while others, incapable
  even of this effort, had the torment of their thoughts aggravated by the
  perpetual noise and confusion that prevailed around them. In the faces of
  those who assumed the most courage, you might trace the furrows of anxious
  care and in the midst of their laboured hilarity dreadful ideas would ever
  and anon intrude, convulsing their features, and working every line into an
  expression of the keenest agony. To these men the sun brought no return of
  joy. Day after day rolled on, but their state was immutable. Existence was
  to them a scene of invariable melancholy; every moment was a moment of
  anguish; yet did they wish to prolong that moment, fearful that the coming
  period would bring a severer fate. They thought of the past with
  insupportable repentance, each man contented to give his right hand to have
  again the choice of that peace and liberty, which he had unthinkingly
  bartered away. We talk of instruments of torture; Englishmen take credit to
  themselves for having banished the use of them from their happy shore! Alas!
  he that has observed the secrets of a prison, well knows that there is more
  torture in the lingering existence of a criminal, in the silent intolerable
  minutes that he spends, than in the tangible misery of whips and racks!
Such were our days. At sunset our jailors appeared, and ordered each man
  to come away, and be locked into his dungeon. It was a bitter aggravation of
  our fate, to be under the arbitrary control of these fellows. They felt no
  man's sorrow; they were of all men least capable of any sort of feeling.
  They had a barbarous and sullen pleasure in issuing their detested mandates,
  and observing the mournful reluctance with which they were obeyed. Whatever
  they directed, it was in vain to expostulate; fetters, and bread and water,
  were the sure consequences of resistance. Their tyranny had no other limit
  than their own caprice. To whom shall the unfortunate felon appeal? To what
  purpose complain, when his complaints are sure to be received with
  incredulity? A tale of mutiny and necessary precaution is the unfailing
  refuge of the keeper, and this tale is an everlasting bar against
  redress.
Our dungeons were cells, 7-1/2 feet by 6-1/2, below the surface of the
  ground, damp, without window, light, or air, except from a few holes worked
  for that purpose in the door. In some of these miserable receptacles three
  persons were put to sleep together.4 I was fortunate
  enough to have one to myself. It was now the approach of winter. We were not
  allowed to have candles, and, as I have already said, were thrust in here at
  sunset, and not liberated till the returning day. This was our situation for
  fourteen or fifteen hours out of the four-and-twenty. I had never been
  accustomed to sleep more than six or seven hours, and my inclination to
  sleep was now less than ever. Thus was I reduced to spend half my day in
  this dreary abode, and in complete darkness. This was no trifling
  aggravation of my lot.
Among my melancholy reflections I tasked my memory, and counted over the
  doors, the locks, the bolts, the chains, the massy walls, and grated
  windows, that were between me and liberty. "These," said I, "are the engines
  that tyranny sits down in cold and serious meditation to invent. This is the
  empire that man exercises over man. Thus is a being, formed to expatiate, to
  act, to smile, and enjoy, restricted and benumbed. How great must be his
  depravity or heedlessness, who vindicates this scheme for changing health
  and gaiety and serenity, into the wanness of a dungeon, and the deep furrows
  of agony and despair!"
"Thank God," exclaims the Englishman, "we have no Bastile! Thank God,
  with us no man can be punished without a crime!" Unthinking wretch! Is that
  a country of liberty, where thousands languish in dungeons and fetters? Go,
  go, ignorant fool! and visit the scenes of our prisons! witness their
  unwholesomeness, their filth, the tyranny of their governors, the misery of
  their inmates! After that, show me the man shameless enough to triumph, and
  say, England has no Bastile! Is there any charge so frivolous, upon which
  men are not consigned to those detested abodes? Is there any villainy that
  is not practised by justices and prosecutors? But against all this perhaps
  you have been told there is redress. Yes; a redress, that it is the
  consummation of insult so much as to name! Where shall the poor wretch
  reduced to the last despair, to whom acquittal perhaps comes just time
  enough to save him from perishing,—where shall this man find leisure,
  and much less money, to fee counsel and officers, and purchase the tedious
  dear-bought remedy of the law? No; he is too happy to leave his dungeon, and
  the memory of his dungeon, behind him; and the same tyranny and wanton
  oppression become the inheritance of his successor.
For myself, I looked round upon my walls, and forward upon the premature
  death I had too much reason to expect: I consulted my own heart, that
  whispered nothing but innocence; and I said, "This is society. This is the
  object, the distribution of justice, which is the end of human reason. For
  this sages have toiled, and midnight oil has been wasted. This!"
The reader will forgive this digression from the immediate subject of my
  story. If it should be said these are general remarks, let it be remembered
  that they are the dear-bought, result of experience. It is from the fulness
  of a bursting heart that reproach thus flows to my pen. These are not the
  declamations of a man desirous to be eloquent. I have felt the iron of
  slavery grating upon my soul.
I believed that misery, more pure than that which I now endured, had
  never fallen to the lot of a human being. I recollected with astonishment my
  puerile eagerness to be brought to the test, and have my innocence examined.
  I execrated it, as the vilest and most insufferable pedantry. I exclaimed,
  in the bitterness of my heart, "Of what value is a fair fame? It is the
  jewel of men formed to be amused with baubles. Without it, I might have had
  serenity of heart and cheerfulness of occupation, peace, and liberty; why
  should I consign my happiness to other men's arbitration? But, if a fair
  fame were of the most inexpressible value, is this the method which common
  sense would prescribe to retrieve it? The language which these institutions
  hold out to the unfortunate is, 'Come, and be shut out from the light of
  day; be the associate of those whom society has marked out for her
  abhorrence, be the slave of jailers, be loaded with fetters; thus shall you
  be cleared from every unworthy aspersion, and restored to reputation and
  honour!' This is the consolation she affords to those whom malignity or
  folly, private pique or unfounded positiveness, have, without the smallest
  foundation, loaded with calumny." For myself, I felt my own innocence; and I
  soon found, upon enquiry, that three fourths of those who are regularly
  subjected to a similar treatment, are persons whom, even with all the
  superciliousness and precipitation of our courts of justice, no evidence can
  be found sufficient to convict. How slender then must be that man's portion
  of information and discernment, who is willing to commit his character and
  welfare to such guardianship!
But my case was even worse than this. I intimately felt that a trial,
  such as our institutions have hitherto been able to make it, is only the
  worthy sequel of such a beginning. What chance was there after the purgation
  I was now suffering, that I should come out acquitted at last? What
  probability was there that the trial I had endured in the house of Mr.
  Falkland was not just as fair as any that might be expected to follow? No; I
  anticipated my own condemnation.
Thus was I cut off, for ever, from all that existence has to
  bestow—from all the high hopes I had so often conceived—from all
  the future excellence my soul so much delighted to imagine,—to spend a
  few weeks in a miserable prison, and then to perish by the hand of the
  public executioner. No language can do justice to the indignant and
  soul-sickening loathing that these ideas excited. My resentment was not
  restricted to my prosecutor, but extended itself to the whole machine of
  society. I could never believe that all this was the fair result of
  institutions inseparable from the general good. I regarded the whole human
  species as so many hangmen and torturers; I considered them as confederated
  to tear me to pieces; and this wide scene of inexorable persecution
  inflicted upon me inexpressible agony. I looked on this side and on that: I
  was innocent; I had a right to expect assistance; but every heart was
  steeled against me; every hand was ready to lend its force to make my ruin
  secure. No man that has not felt, in his own most momentous concerns,
  justice, eternal truth, unalterable equity engaged in his behalf, and on the
  other side brute force, impenetrable obstinacy, and unfeeling insolence, can
  imagine the sensations that then passed through my mind. I saw treachery
  triumphant and enthroned; I saw the sinews of innocence crumbled into dust
  by the gripe of almighty guilt.
What relief had I from these sensations? Was it relief, that I spent the
  day in the midst of profligacy and execrations—that I saw reflected
  from every countenance agonies only inferior to my own? He that would form a
  lively idea of the regions of the damned, need only to witness, for six
  hours, a scene to which I was confined for many months. Not for one hour
  could I withdraw myself from this complexity of horrors, or take refuge in
  the calmness of meditation. Air, exercise, series, contrast, those grand
  enliveners of the human frame, I was for ever debarred from, by the
  inexorable tyranny under which I was fallen. Nor did I find the solitude of
  my nightly dungeon less insupportable. Its only furniture was the straw that
  served me for my repose. It was narrow, damp, and unwholesome. The slumbers
  of a mind, wearied, like mine, with the most detestable uniformity, to whom
  neither amusement nor occupation ever offered themselves to beguile the
  painful hours, were short, disturbed, and unrefreshing. My sleeping, still
  more than my waking thoughts, were full of perplexity, deformity, and
  disorder. To these slumbers succeeded the hours which, by the regulations of
  our prison, I was obliged, though awake, to spend in solitary and cheerless
  darkness. Here I had neither books nor pens, nor any thing upon which to
  engage my attention; all was a sightless blank. How was a mind, active and
  indefatigable like mine, to endure this misery? I could not sink it in
  lethargy; I could nor forget my woes: they haunted me with unintermitted and
  demoniac malice. Cruel, inexorable policy of human affairs, that condemns a
  man to torture like this; that sanctions it, and knows not what is done
  under its sanction; that is too supine and unfeeling to enquire into these
  petty details; that calls this the ordeal of innocence, and the protector of
  freedom! A thousand times I could have dashed my brains against the walls of
  my dungeon; a thousand times I longed for death, and wished, with
  inexpressible ardour, for an end to what I suffered; a thousand times I
  meditated suicide, and ruminated, in the bitterness of my soul, upon the
  different means of escaping from the load of existence. What had I to do
  with life? I had seen enough to make me regard it with detestation. Why
  should I wait the lingering process of legal despotism, and not dare so much
  as to die, but when and how its instruments decreed? Still some inexplicable
  suggestion withheld my hand. I clung with desperate fondness to this shadow
  of existence, its mysterious attractions, and its hopeless prospects.

</div></body></text></TEI>