<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">CHAPTER III.
From the moment he entered upon the execution of this purpose, dictated
  as it probably was by an unaffected principle of duty, his misfortunes took
  their commencement. All I have further to state of his history is the
  uninterrupted persecution of a malignant destiny, a series of adventures
  that seemed to take their rise in various accidents, but pointing to one
  termination. Him they overwhelmed with an anguish he was of all others least
  qualified to bear; and these waters of bitterness, extending beyond him,
  poured their deadly venom upon others. I being myself the most unfortunate
  of their victims.
The person in whom these calamities originated was Mr. Falkland's nearest
  neighbour, a man of estate equal to his own, by name Barnabas Tyrrel. This
  man one might at first have supposed of all others least qualified from
  instruction, or inclined by the habits of his life, to disturb the
  enjoyments of a mind so richly endowed as that of Mr. Falkland. Mr. Tyrrel
  might have passed for a true model of the English squire. He was early left
  under the tuition of his mother, a woman of narrow capacity, and who had no
  other child. The only remaining member of the family it may be necessary to
  notice was Miss Emily Melville, the orphan daughter of Mr. Tyrrel's paternal
  aunt; who now resided in the family mansion, and was wholly dependent on the
  benevolence of its proprietors.
Mrs. Tyrrel appeared to think that there was nothing in the world so
  precious as her hopeful Barnabas. Every thing must give way to his
  accommodation and advantage; every one must yield the most servile obedience
  to his commands. He must not be teased or restricted by any forms of
  instruction; and of consequence his proficiency, even in the arts of writing
  and reading, was extremely slender. From his birth he was muscular and
  sturdy; and, confined to the ruelle of his mother, he made much such
  a figure as the whelp-lion that a barbarian might have given for a lap-dog
  to his mistress.
But he soon broke loose from these trammels, and formed an acquaintance
  with the groom and the game-keeper. Under their instruction he proved as
  ready a scholar, as he had been indocile and restive to the pedant who held
  the office of his tutor. It was now evident that his small proficiency in
  literature was by no means to be ascribed to want of capacity. He discovered
  no contemptible sagacity and quick-wittedness in the science of horse-flesh,
  and was eminently expert in the arts of shooting, fishing, and hunting. Nor
  did he confine himself to these, but added the theory and practice of
  boxing, cudgel play, and quarter-staff. These exercises added ten-fold
  robustness and vigour to his former qualifications.
His stature, when grown, was somewhat more than five feet ten inches in
  height, and his form might have been selected by a painter as a model for
  that hero of antiquity, whose prowess consisted in felling an ox with his
  fist, and devouring him at a meal. Conscious of his advantage in this
  respect, he was insupportably arrogant, tyrannical to his inferiors, and
  insolent to his equals. The activity of his mind being diverted from the
  genuine field of utility and distinction, showed itself in the rude tricks
  of an overgrown lubber. Here, as in all his other qualifications, he rose
  above his competitors; and if it had been possible to overlook the callous
  and unrelenting disposition which they manifested, one could scarcely have
  denied his applause to the invention these freaks displayed, and the rough,
  sarcastic wit with which they were accompanied.
Mr. Tyrrel was by no means inclined to permit these extraordinary merits
  to rust in oblivion. There was a weekly assembly at the nearest market-town,
  the resort of all the rural gentry. Here he had hitherto figured to the
  greatest advantage as grand master of the coterie, no one having an
  equal share of opulence, and the majority, though still pretending to the
  rank of gentry, greatly his inferior in this essential article. The young
  men in this circle looked up to this insolent bashaw with timid respect,
  conscious of the comparative eminence that unquestionably belonged to the
  powers of his mind; and he well knew how to maintain his rank with an
  inflexible hand. Frequently indeed he relaxed his features, and assumed a
  temporary appearance of affableness and familiarity; but they found by
  experience, that if any one, encouraged by his condescension, forgot the
  deference which Mr. Tyrrel considered as his due, he was soon taught to
  repent his presumption. It was a tiger that thought proper to toy with a
  mouse, the little animal every moment in danger of being crushed by the
  fangs of his ferocious associate. As Mr. Tyrrel had considerable copiousness
  of speech, and a rich, but undisciplined imagination, he was always sure of
  an audience. His neighbours crowded round, and joined in the ready laugh,
  partly from obsequiousness, and partly from unfeigned admiration. It
  frequently happened, however; that, in the midst of his good humour, a
  characteristic refinement of tyranny would suggest itself to his mind. When
  his subjects, encouraged by his familiarity, had discarded their precaution,
  the wayward fit would seize him, a sudden cloud overspread his brow, his
  voice transform from the pleasant to the terrible, and a quarrel of a straw
  immediately ensue with the first man whose face he did not like. The
  pleasure that resulted to others from the exuberant sallies of his
  imagination was, therefore, not unalloyed with sudden qualms of apprehension
  and terror. It may be believed that this despotism did not gain its final
  ascendancy without being contested in the outset. But all opposition was
  quelled with a high hand by this rural Antaeus. By the ascendancy of his
  fortune, and his character among his neighbours, he always reduced his
  adversary to the necessity of encountering him at his own weapons, and did
  not dismiss him without making him feel his presumption through every joint
  in his frame. The tyranny of Mr. Tyrrel would not have been so patiently
  endured, had not his colloquial accomplishments perpetually come in aid of
  that authority which his rank and prowess originally obtained.
The situation of our squire with the fair was still more enviable than
  that which he maintained among persons of his own sex. Every mother taught
  her daughter to consider the hand of Mr. Tyrrel as the highest object of her
  ambition. Every daughter regarded his athletic form and his acknowledged
  prowess with a favourable eye. A form eminently athletic is, perhaps, always
  well proportioned; and one of the qualifications that women are early taught
  to look for in the male sex, is that of a protector. As no man was
  adventurous enough to contest his superiority, so scarcely any woman in this
  provincial circle would have scrupled to prefer his addresses to those of
  any other admirer. His boisterous wit had peculiar charms for them; and
  there was no spectacle more flattering to their vanity, than seeing this
  Hercules exchange his club for a distaff. It was pleasing to them to
  consider, that the fangs of this wild beast, the very idea of which inspired
  trepidation into the boldest hearts, might be played with by them with the
  utmost security.
Such was the rival that Fortune, in her caprice, had reserved for the
  accomplished Falkland. This untamed, though not undiscerning brute, was
  found capable of destroying the prospects of a man the most eminently
  qualified to enjoy and to communicate happiness. The feud that sprung up
  between them was nourished by concurring circumstances, till it attained a
  magnitude difficult to be paralleled; and, because they regarded each other
  with a deadly hatred, I have become an object of misery and abhorrence.
The arrival of Mr. Falkland gave an alarming shock to the authority of
  Mr. Tyrrel in the village assembly and in all scenes of indiscriminate
  resort. His disposition by no means inclined him to withhold himself from
  scenes of fashionable amusement; and he and his competitor were like two
  stars fated never to appear at once above the horizon. The advantages Mr.
  Falkland possessed in the comparison are palpable; and had it been
  otherwise, the subjects of his rural neighbour were sufficiently disposed to
  revolt against his merciless dominion. They had hitherto submitted from
  fear, and not from love; and, if they had not rebelled, it was only for want
  of a leader. Even the ladies regarded Mr. Falkland with particular
  complacence. His polished manners were peculiarly in harmony with feminine
  delicacy. The sallies of his wit were far beyond those of Mr. Tyrrel in
  variety and vigour; in addition to which they had the advantage of having
  their spontaneous exuberance guided and restrained by the sagacity of a
  cultivated mind. The graces of his person were enhanced by the elegance of
  his deportment; and the benevolence and liberality of his temper were upon
  all occasions conspicuous. It was common indeed to Mr. Tyrrel, together with
  Mr. Falkland, to be little accessible to sentiments of awkwardness and
  confusion. But for this Mr. Tyrrel was indebted to a self-satisfied
  effrontery, and a boisterous and over-bearing elocution, by which he was
  accustomed to discomfit his assailants; while Mr. Falkland, with great
  ingenuity and candour of mind, was enabled by his extensive knowledge of the
  world, and acquaintance with his own resources, to perceive almost
  instantaneously the proceeding it most became him to adopt.
Mr. Tyrrel contemplated the progress of his rival with uneasiness and
  aversion. He often commented upon it to his particular confidents as a thing
  altogether inconceivable. Mr. Falkland he described as an animal that was
  beneath contempt. Diminutive and dwarfish in his form, he wanted to set up a
  new standard of human nature, adapted to his miserable condition. He wished
  to persuade people that the human species were made to be nailed to a chair,
  and to pore over books. He would have them exchange those robust exercises
  which make us joyous in the performance, and vigorous in the consequences,
  for the wise labour of scratching our heads for a rhyme and counting our
  fingers for a verse. Monkeys were as good men as these. A nation of such
  animals would have no chance with a single regiment of the old English
  votaries of beef and pudding. He never saw any thing come of learning but to
  make people foppish and impertinent; and a sensible man would not wish a
  worse calamity to the enemies of his nation, than to see them run mad after
  such pernicious absurdities. It was impossible that people could seriously
  feel any liking for such a ridiculous piece of goods as this outlandish
  foreign-made Englishman. But he knew very well how it was: it was a
  miserable piece of mummery that was played only in spite of him. But God for
  ever blast his soul, if he were not bitterly revenged upon them all!
If such were the sentiments of Mr. Tyrrel, his patience found ample
  exercise in the language which was held by the rest of his neighbours on the
  same subject. While he saw nothing in Mr. Falkland but matter of contempt,
  they appeared to be never weary of recounting his praises. Such dignity,
  such affability, so perpetual an attention to the happiness of others, such
  delicacy of sentiment and expression! Learned without ostentation, refined
  without foppery, elegant without effeminacy! Perpetually anxious to prevent
  his superiority from being painfully felt, it was so much the more certainly
  felt to be real, and excited congratulation instead of envy in the
  spectator. It is scarcely necessary to remark, that the revolution of
  sentiment in this rural vicinity belongs to one of the most obvious features
  of the human mind. The rudest exhibition of art is at first admired, till a
  nobler is presented, and we are taught to wonder at the facility with which
  before we had been satisfied. Mr. Tyrrel thought there would be no end to
  the commendation; and expected when their common acquaintance would fall
  down and adore the intruder. The most inadvertent expression of applause
  inflicted upon him the torment of demons. He writhed with agony, his
  features became distorted, and his looks inspired terror. Such suffering
  would probably have soured the kindest temper; what must have been its
  effect upon Mr. Tyrrel's, always fierce, unrelenting, and abrupt?
The advantages of Mr. Falkland seemed by no means to diminish with their
  novelty. Every new sufferer from Mr. Tyrrel's tyranny immediately went over
  to the standard of his adversary. The ladies, though treated by their rustic
  swain with more gentleness than the men, were occasionally exposed to his
  capriciousness and insolence. They could not help remarking the contrast
  between these two leaders in the fields of chivalry, the one of whom paid no
  attention to any one's pleasure but his own, while the other seemed all
  good-humour and benevolence. It was in vain that Mr. Tyrrel endeavoured to
  restrain the ruggedness of his character. His motive was impatience, his
  thoughts were gloomy, and his courtship was like the pawings of an elephant.
  It appeared as if his temper had been more human while he indulged in its
  free bent, than now that he sullenly endeavoured to put fetters upon its
  excesses.
Among the ladies of the village-assembly already mentioned, there was
  none that seemed to engage more of the kindness of Mr. Tyrrel than Miss
  Hardingham. She was also one of the few that had not yet gone over to the
  enemy, either because she really preferred the gentleman who was her oldest
  acquaintance, or that she conceived from calculation this conduct best
  adapted to insure her success in a husband. One day, however, she thought
  proper, probably only by way of experiment, to show Mr. Tyrrel that she
  could engage in hostilities, if he should at any time give her sufficient
  provocation. She so adjusted her manoeuvres as to be engaged by Mr. Falkland
  as his partner for the dance of the evening, though without the smallest
  intention on the part of that gentleman (who was unpardonably deficient in
  the sciences of anecdote and match-making) of giving offence to his country
  neighbour. Though the manners of Mr. Falkland were condescending and
  attentive, his hours of retirement were principally occupied in
  contemplations too dignified for scandal, and too large for the altercations
  of a vestry, or the politics of an election-borough.
A short time before the dances began, Mr. Tyrrel went up to his fair
  inamorata, and entered into some trifling conversation with her to fill up
  the time, as intending in a few minutes to lead her forward to the field. He
  had accustomed himself to neglect the ceremony of soliciting beforehand a
  promise in his favour, as not supposing it possible that any one would dare
  dispute his behests; and, had it been otherwise, he would have thought the
  formality unnecessary in this case, his general preference to Miss
  Hardingham being notorious.
While he was thus engaged, Mr. Falkland came up. Mr. Tyrrel always
  regarded him with aversion and loathing. Mr. Falkland, however, slided in a
  graceful and unaffected manner into the conversation already begun; and the
  animated ingenuousness of his manner was such, as might for the time have
  disarmed the devil of his malice. Mr. Tyrrel probably conceived that his
  accosting Miss Hardingham was an accidental piece of general ceremony, and
  expected every moment when he would withdraw to another part of the
  room.
The company now began to be in motion for the dance, and Mr. Falkland
  signified as much to Miss Hardingham. "Sir," interrupted Mr. Tyrrel
  abruptly, "that lady is my partner."—"I believe not, sir: that lady
  has been so obliging as to accept my invitation."—"I tell you, sir,
  no. Sir, I have an interest in that lady's affections; and I will suffer no
  man to intrude upon my claims."—"The lady's affections are not the
  subject of the present question."—"Sir, it is to no purpose to parley.
  Make room, sir!"—Mr. Falkland gently repelled his antagonist. "Mr.
  Tyrrel!" returned he, with some firmness, "let us have no altercation in
  this business: the master of the ceremonies is the proper person to decide
  in a difference of this sort, if we cannot adjust it: we can neither of us
  intend to exhibit our valour before the ladies, and shall therefore
  cheerfully submit to his verdict."—"Damn me, sir, if I
  understand—" "Softly, Mr. Tyrrel; I intended you no offence. But, sir,
  no man shall prevent my asserting that to which I have once acquired a
  claim!"
Mr. Falkland uttered these words with the most unruffled temper in the
  world. The tone in which he spoke had acquired elevation, but neither
  roughness nor impatience. There was a fascination in his manner that made
  the ferociousness of his antagonist subside into impotence. Miss Hardingham
  had begun to repent of her experiment, but her alarm was speedily quieted by
  the dignified composure of her new partner. Mr. Tyrrel walked away without
  answering a word. He muttered curses as he went, which the laws of honour
  did not oblige Mr. Falkland to overhear, and which indeed it would have been
  no easy task to have overheard with accuracy. Mr. Tyrrel would not, perhaps,
  have so easily given up his point, had not his own good sense presently
  taught him, that, however eager he might be for revenge, this was not the
  ground he should desire to occupy. But, though he could not openly resent
  this rebellion against his authority, he brooded over it in the recesses of
  a malignant mind; and it was evident enough that he was accumulating
  materials for a bitter account, to which he trusted his adversary should one
  day be brought.

</div></body></text></TEI>