<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="27">CHAPTER XIV.
I was conducted to the keeper's room for that night, and the two men sat
  up with me. I was accosted with many interrogatories, to which I gave little
  answer, but complained of the hurt in my leg. To this I could obtain no
  reply, except "Curse you, my lad! if that be all, we will give you some
  ointment for that; we will anoint it with a little cold iron." They were
  indeed excessively sulky with me, for having broken their night's rest, and
  given them all this trouble. In the morning they were as good as their word,
  fixing a pair of fetters upon both my legs, regardless of the ankle which
  was now swelled to a considerable size, and then fastening me, with a
  padlock, to a staple in the floor of my dungeon. I expostulated with warmth
  upon this treatment, and told them, that I was a man upon whom the law as
  yet had passed no censure, and who therefore, in the eye of the law, was
  innocent. But they bid me keep such fudge for people who knew no better;
  they knew what they did, and would answer it to any court in England.
The pain of the fetter was intolerable. I endeavoured in various ways to
  relieve it, and even privily to free my leg; but the more it was swelled,
  the more was this rendered impossible. I then resolved to bear it with
  patience: still, the longer it continued, the worse it grew. After two days
  and two nights, I entreated the turnkey to go and ask the surgeon, who
  usually attended the prison, to look at it, for, if it continued longer as
  it was, I was convinced it would mortify. But he glared surlily at me, and
  said, "Damn my blood! I should like to see that day. To die of a
  mortification is too good an end for such a rascal!" At the time that he
  thus addressed me, the whole mass of my blood was already fevered by the
  anguish I had undergone, my patience was wholly exhausted, and I was silly
  enough to be irritated beyond bearing, by his impertinence and vulgarity:
  "Look, you, Mr. Turnkey," said I, "there is one thing that such fellows as
  you are set over us for, and another thing that you are not. You are to take
  care we do not escape; but it is no part of your office to call us names and
  abuse us. If I were not chained to the floor, you dare as well eat your
  fingers as use such language; and, take my word for it, you shall yet live
  to repent of your insolence."
While I thus spoke, the man stared at me with astonishment. He was so
  little accustomed to such retorts, that, at first, he could scarcely believe
  his ears; and such was the firmness of my manner, that he seemed to forget
  for a moment that I was not at large. But, as soon as he had time to
  recollect himself, he did not deign to be angry. His face relaxed into a
  smile of contempt; he snapped his fingers at me; and, turning upon his heel,
  exclaimed, "Well said, my cock! crow away! Have a care you do not burst!"
  and, as he shut the door upon me, mimicked the voice of the animal he
  mentioned.
This rejoinder brought me to myself in a moment, and showed me the
  impotence of the resentment I was expressing. But, though he thus put an end
  to the violence of my speech, the torture of my body continued as great as
  ever. I was determined to change my mode of attack. The same turnkey
  returned in a few minutes; and, as he approached me, to put down some food
  he had brought, I slipped a shilling into his hand, saying at the same time,
  "My good fellow, for God's sake, go to the surgeon; I am sure you do not
  wish me to perish for want of assistance." The fellow put the shilling into
  his pocket, looked hard at me, and then with one nod of his head, and
  without uttering a single word, went away. The surgeon presently after made
  his appearance; and, finding the part in a high state of inflammation,
  ordered certain applications, and gave peremptory directions that the fetter
  should not be replaced upon that leg, till a cure had been effected. It was
  a full month before the leg was perfectly healed, and made equally strong
  and flexible with the other.
The condition in which I was now placed, was totally different from that
  which had preceded this attempt. I was chained all day in my dungeon, with
  no other mitigation, except that the door was regularly opened for a few
  hours in an afternoon, at which time some of the prisoners occasionally came
  and spoke to me, particularly one, who, though he could ill replace my
  benevolent Brightwel, was not deficient in excellent qualities. This was no
  other than the individual whom Mr. Falkland had, some months before,
  dismissed upon an accusation of murder. His courage was gone, his garb was
  squalid, and the comeliness and clearness of his countenance was utterly
  obliterated. He also was innocent, worthy, brave, and benevolent. He was, I
  believe, afterwards acquitted, and turned loose, to wander a desolate and
  perturbed spectre through the world. My manual labours were now at an end;
  my dungeon was searched every night, and every kind of tool carefully kept
  from me. The straw, which had been hitherto allowed me, was removed, under
  pretence that it was adapted for concealment; and the only conveniences with
  which I was indulged, were a chair and a blanket.
A prospect of some alleviation in no long time opened upon me; but this
  my usual ill fortune rendered abortive. The keeper once more made his
  appearance, and with his former constitutional and ambiguous humanity. He
  pretended to be surprised at my want of every accommodation. He reprehended
  in strong terms my attempt to escape, and observed, that there must be an
  end of civility from people in his situation, if gentlemen, after all, would
  not know when they were well. It was necessary, in cases the like of this,
  to let the law take its course; and it would be ridiculous in me to
  complain, if, after a regular trial, things should go hard with me. He was
  desirous of being in every respect my friend, if I would let him. In the
  midst of this circumlocution and preamble, he was called away from me, for
  something relating to the business of his office. In the mean time I
  ruminated upon his overtures; and, detesting as I did the source from which
  I conceived them to flow, I could not help reflecting how far it would be
  possible to extract from them the means of escape. But my meditations in
  this case were vain. The keeper returned no more during the remainder of
  that day, and, on the next, an incident occurred which put an end to all
  expectations from his kindness.
An active mind, which has once been forced into any particular train, can
  scarcely be persuaded to desert it as hopeless. I had studied my chains,
  during the extreme anguish that I endured from the pressure of the fetter
  upon the ankle which had been sprained; and though, from the swelling and
  acute sensibility of the part, I had found all attempts at relief, in that
  instance, impracticable, I obtained, from the coolness of my investigation,
  another and apparently superior advantage. During the night, my dungeon was
  in a complete state of darkness; but, when the door was open, the case was
  somewhat different. The passage indeed into which it opened, was so narrow,
  and the opposite dead wall so near, that it was but a glimmering and
  melancholy light that entered my apartment, even at full noon, and when the
  door was at its widest extent. But my eyes, after a practice of two or three
  weeks, accommodated themselves to this circumstance, and I learned to
  distinguish the minutest object. One day, as I was alternately meditating
  and examining the objects around me, I chanced to observe a nail trodden
  into the mud-floor at no great distance from me. I immediately conceived the
  desire of possessing myself of this implement; but, for fear of surprise,
  people passing perpetually to and fro, I contented myself, for the present,
  with remarking its situation so accurately, that I might easily find it
  again in the dark. Accordingly, as soon as my door was shut, I seized upon
  this new treasure, and, having contrived to fashion it to my purpose, found
  that I could unlock with it the padlock that fastened me to the staple in
  the floor. This I regarded as no inconsiderable advantage, separately from
  the use I might derive from it in relation to my principal object. My chain
  permitted me to move only about eighteen inches to the right or left; and,
  having borne this confinement for several weeks, my very heart leaped at the
  pitiful consolation of being able to range, without constraint, the
  miserable coop in which I was immured. This incident had occurred several
  days previously to the last visit of my keeper.
From this time it had been my constant practice to liberate myself every
  night, and not to replace things in their former situation till I awoke in
  the morning, and expected shortly to perceive the entrance of the turnkey.
  Security breeds negligence. On the morning succeeding my conference with the
  jailor, it so happened, whether I overslept myself, or the turnkey went his
  round earlier than usual, that I was roused from my sleep by the noise he
  made in opening the cell next to my own; and though I exerted the utmost
  diligence, yet having to grope for my materials in the dark, I was unable to
  fasten the chain to the staple, before he entered, as usual, with his
  lantern. He was extremely surprised to find me disengaged, and immediately
  summoned the principal keeper. I was questioned respecting my method of
  proceeding; and, as I believed concealment could lead to nothing but a
  severer search, and a more accurate watch, I readily acquainted them with
  the exact truth. The illustrious personage, whose functions it was to
  control the inhabitants of these walls, was, by this last instance,
  completely exasperated against me. Artifice and fair speaking were at an
  end. His eyes sparkled with fury; he exclaimed, that he was now convinced of
  the folly of showing kindness to rascals, the scum of the earth, such as I
  was; and, damn him, if any body should catch him at that again towards any
  one. I had cured him effectually! He was astonished that the laws had not
  provided some terrible retaliation for thieves that attempted to deceive
  their jailors. Hanging was a thousand times too good for me!
Having vented his indignation, he proceeded to give such orders as the
  united instigations of anger and alarm suggested to his mind. My apartment
  was changed. I was conducted to a room called the strong room, the door of
  which opened into the middle cell of the range of dungeons. It was
  under-ground, as they were, and had also the day-room for felons, already
  described, immediately over it. It was spacious and dreary. The door had not
  been opened for years; the air was putrid; and the walls hung round with
  damps and mildew. The fetters, the padlock, and the staple, were employed,
  as in the former case, in addition to which they put on me a pair of
  handcuffs. For my first provision, the keeper sent me nothing but a bit of
  bread, mouldy and black, and some dirty and stinking water. I know not
  indeed whether this is to be regarded as gratuitous tyranny on the part of
  the jailor; the law having providently directed, in certain cases, that the
  water to be administered to the prisoners shall be taken from "the next sink
  or puddle nearest to the jail."5 It was further
  ordered, that one of the turnkeys should sleep in the cell that formed a
  sort of anti-chamber to my apartment. Though every convenience was provided,
  to render this chamber fit for the reception of a personage of a dignity so
  superior to the felon he was appointed to guard, he expressed much
  dissatisfaction at the mandate: but there was no alternative.
The situation to which I was thus removed was, apparently, the most
  undesirable that could be imagined but I was not discouraged; I had for some
  time learned not to judge by appearances. The apartment was dark and
  unwholesome; but I had acquired the secret of counteracting these
  influences. My door was kept continually shut, and the other prisoners were
  debarred access to me; but if the intercourse of our fellow-men has its
  pleasure, solitude, on the other hand, is not without its advantages. In
  solitude we can pursue our own thoughts undisturbed; and I was able to call
  up at will the most pleasing avocations. Besides which, to one who meditated
  such designs as now filled my mind, solitude had peculiar recommendations. I
  was scarcely left to myself, before I tried an experiment, the idea of which
  I conceived, while they were fixing my handcuffs; and, with my teeth only,
  disengaged myself from this restraint. The hours at which I was visited by
  the keepers were regular, and I took care to be provided for them. Add to
  which, I had a narrow grated window near the ceiling, about nine inches in
  perpendicular, and a foot and a half horizontally, which, though small,
  admitted a much stronger light than that to which I had been accustomed for
  several weeks. Thus circumstanced, I scarcely ever found myself in total
  darkness, and was better provided against surprises than I had been in my
  preceding situation. Such were the sentiments which this change of abode
  immediately suggested.
I had been a very little time removed, when I received an unexpected
  visit from Thomas, Mr. Falkland's footman, whom I have already mentioned in
  the course of my narrative. A servant of Mr. Forester happened to come to
  the town where I was imprisoned, a few weeks before, while I was confined
  with the hurt in my ankle, and had called in to see me. The account he gave
  of what he observed had been the source of many an uneasy sensation to
  Thomas. The former visit was a matter of mere curiosity; but Thomas was of
  the better order of servants. He was considerably struck at the sight of me.
  Though my mind was now serene, and my health sufficiently good, yet the
  floridness of my complexion was gone, and there was a rudeness in my
  physiognomy, the consequence of hardship and fortitude, extremely unlike the
  sleekness of my better days. Thomas looked alternately in my face, at my
  hands, and my feet; and then fetched a deep sigh. After a pause,
"Lord bless us!" said he, in a voice in which commiseration was
  sufficiently perceptible, "is this you?"
"Why not, Thomas? You knew I was sent to prison, did not you?"
"Prison! and must people in prison be shackled and bound of that
  fashion?—and where do you lay of nights?"
"Here."
"Here? Why there is no bed!"
"No, Thomas, I am not allowed a bed. I had straw formerly, but that is
  taken away."
"And do they take off them there things of nights?"
"No; I am expected to sleep just as you see."
"Sleep! Why I thought this was a Christian country; but this usage is too
  bad for a dog."
"You must not say so, Thomas; it is what the wisdom of government has
  thought fit to provide."
"Zounds, how I have been deceived! They told me what a fine thing it was
  to be an Englishman, and about liberty and property, and all that there; and
  I find it is all a flam. Lord, what fools we be! Things are done under our
  very noses, and we know nothing of the matter; and a parcel of fellows with
  grave faces swear to us, that such things never happen but in France, and
  other countries the like of that. Why, you ha'n't been tried, ha' you?"
"No."
"And what signifies being tried, when they do worse than hang a man, and
  all beforehand? Well, master Williams, you have been very wicked to be sure,
  and I thought it would have done me good to see you hanged. But, I do not
  know how it is, one's heart melts, and pity comes over one, if we take time
  to cool. I know that ought not to be; but, damn it, when I talked of your
  being hanged, I did not think of your suffering all this into the
  bargain."
Soon after this conversation Thomas left me. The idea of the long
  connection of our families rushed upon his memory, and he felt more for my
  sufferings, at the moment, than I did for myself. In the afternoon I was
  surprised to see him again. He said that he could not get the thought of me
  out of his mind, and therefore he hoped I would not be displeased at his
  coming once more to take leave of me. I could perceive that he had something
  upon his mind, which he did not know how to discharge. One of the turnkeys
  had each time come into the room with him, and continued as long as he
  staid. Upon some avocation however—a noise, I believe, in the
  passage—the turnkey went as far as the door to satisfy his curiosity;
  and Thomas, watching the opportunity, slipped into my hand a chisel, a file,
  and a saw, exclaiming at the same time with a sorrowful tone, "I know I am
  doing wrong; but, if they hang me too, I cannot help it; I cannot do no
  other. For Christ's sake, get out of this place; I cannot bear the thoughts
  of it!" I received the implements with great joy, and thrust them into my
  bosom; and, as soon as he was gone, concealed them in the rushes of my
  chair. For himself he had accomplished the object for which he came, and
  presently after bade me farewell.
The next day, the keepers, I know not for what reason, were more than
  usually industrious in their search, saying, though without assigning any
  ground for their suspicion, that they were sure I had some tool in my
  possession that I ought not; but the depository I had chosen escaped
  them.
I waited from this time the greater part of a week, that I might have the
  benefit of a bright moonlight. It was necessary that I should work in the
  night; it was necessary that my operations should be performed between the
  last visit of the keepers at night and their first in the morning, that is,
  between nine in the evening and seven. In my dungeon, as I have already
  said, I passed fourteen or sixteen hours of the four-and-twenty undisturbed;
  but since I had acquired a character for mechanical ingenuity, a particular
  exception with respect to me was made from the general rules of the
  prison.
It was ten o'clock when I entered on my undertaking. The room in which I
  was confined was secured with a double door. This was totally superfluous
  for the purpose of my detention, since there was a sentinel planted on the
  outside. But it was very fortunate for my plan; because these doors
  prevented the easy communication of sound, and afforded me tolerable
  satisfaction that, with a little care in my mode of proceeding, I might be
  secure against the danger of being overheard. I first took off my handcuffs.
  I then filed through my fetters; and next performed the same service to
  three of the iron bars that secured my window, to which I climbed, partly by
  the assistance of my chair, and partly by means of certain irregularities in
  the wall. All this was the work of more than two hours. When the bars were
  filed through, I easily forced them a little from the perpendicular, and
  then drew them, one by one, out of the wall, into which they were sunk about
  three inches perfectly straight, and without any precaution to prevent their
  being removed. But the space thus obtained was by no means wide enough to
  admit the passing of my body. I therefore applied myself, partly with my
  chisel, and partly with one of the iron bars, to the loosening the
  brick-work; and when I had thus disengaged four or five bricks, I got down
  and piled them upon the floor. This operation I repeated three or four times
  The space was now sufficient for my purpose: and, having crept through the
  opening, I stepped upon a shed on the outside.
I was now in a kind of rude area between two dead walls, that south of
  the felons' day-room (the windows of which were at the east end) and the
  wall of the prison. But I had not, as formerly, any instruments to assist me
  in scaling the wall, which was of considerable height. There was, of
  consequence, no resource for me but that of effecting a practicable breach
  in the lower part of the wall, which was of no contemptible strength, being
  of stone on the outside, with a facing of brick within. The rooms for the
  debtors were at right angles with the building from which I had just
  escaped; and, as the night was extremely bright, I was in momentary danger,
  particularly in case of the least noise, of being discovered by them,
  several of their windows commanding this area. Thus circumstanced, I
  determined to make the shed answer the purpose of concealment. It was
  locked; but, with the broken link of my fetters, which I had had the
  precaution to bring with me, I found no great difficulty in opening the
  lock. I had now got a sufficient means of hiding my person while I proceeded
  in my work, attended with no other disadvantage than that of being obliged
  to leave the door, through which I had thus broken, a little open for the
  sake of light. After some time, I had removed a considerable part of the
  brick-work of the outer wall; but, when I came to the stone, I found the
  undertaking infinitely more difficult. The mortar which bound together the
  building was, by length of time, nearly petrified, and appeared to my first
  efforts one solid rock of the hardest adamant. I had now been six hours
  incessantly engaged in incredible labour: my chisel broke in the first
  attempt upon this new obstacle; and between fatigue already endured, and the
  seemingly invincible difficulty before me, I concluded that I must remain
  where I was, and gave up the idea of further effort as useless. At the same
  time the moon, whose light had till now been of the greatest use to me, set,
  and I was left in total darkness.
After a respite of ten minutes however, I returned to the attack with new
  vigour. It could not be less than two hours before the first stone was
  loosened from the edifice. In one hour more, the space was sufficient to
  admit of my escape. The pile of bricks I had left in the strong room was
  considerable. But it was a mole-hill compared with the ruins I had forced
  from the outer wall. I am fully assured that the work I had thus performed
  would have been to a common labourer, with every advantage of tools, the
  business of two or three days. But my difficulties, instead of being ended,
  seemed to be only begun. The day broke, before I had completed the opening,
  and in ten minutes more the keepers would probably enter my apartment, and
  perceive the devastation I had left. The lane, which connected the side of
  the prison through which I had escaped with the adjacent country, was formed
  chiefly by two dead walls, with here and there a stable, a few warehouses,
  and some mean habitations, tenanted by the lower order of people. My best
  security lay in clearing the town as soon as possible, and depending upon
  the open country for protection. My arms were intolerably swelled and
  bruised with my labour, and my strength seemed wholly exhausted with
  fatigue. Speed I was nearly unable to exert for any continuance; and, if I
  could, with the enemy so close at my heels, speed would too probably have
  been useless. It appeared as if I were now in almost the same situation as
  that in which I had been placed five or six weeks before, in which, after
  having completed my escape, I was obliged to yield myself up, without
  resistance, to my pursuers. I was not however disabled as then; I was
  capable of exertion, to what precise extent I could not ascertain; and I was
  well aware, that every instance in which I should fail of my purpose would
  contribute to enhance the difficulty of any future attempt. Such were the
  considerations that presented themselves in relation to my escape; and, even
  if that were effected, I had to reckon among my difficulties, that, at the
  time I quitted my prison, I was destitute of every resource, and had not a
  shilling remaining in the world.

</div></body></text></TEI>