<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="20">CHAPTER VII.
In no long time after the disclosure Mr. Falkland had made, Mr. Forester,
  his elder brother by the mother's side, came to reside for a short period in
  our family. This was a circumstance peculiarly adverse to my patron's habits
  and inclinations. He had broken off, as I have already said, all intercourse
  of visiting with his neighbours. He debarred himself every kind of amusement
  and relaxation. He shrunk from the society of his fellows, and thought he
  could never be sufficiently buried in obscurity and solitude. This principle
  was, in most cases, of no difficult execution to a man of firmness. But Mr.
  Falkland knew not how to avoid the visit of Mr. Forester. This gentleman was
  just returned from a residence of several years upon the continent; and his
  demand of an apartment in the house of his half-brother, till his own house
  at the distance of thirty miles should be prepared for his reception, was
  made with an air of confidence that scarcely admitted of a refusal. Mr.
  Falkland could only allege, that the state of his health and spirits was
  such, that he feared a residence at his house would be little agreeable to
  his kinsman; and Mr. Forester conceived that this was a disqualification
  which would always augment in proportion as it was tolerated, and hoped that
  his society, by inducing Mr. Falkland to suspend his habits of seclusion,
  would be the means of essential benefit. Mr. Falkland opposed him no
  further. He would have been sorry to be thought unkind to a kinsman for whom
  he had a particular esteem; and the consciousness of not daring to assign
  the true reason, made him cautious of adhering to his objection.
The character of Mr. Forester was, in many respects, the reverse of that
  of my master. His very appearance indicated the singularity of his
  disposition. His figure was short and angular. His eyes were sunk far into
  his head, and were overhung with eye-brows, black, thick, and bushy. His
  complexion was swarthy, and his lineaments hard. He had seen much of the
  world; but, to judge of him from his appearance and manners, one would have
  thought that he had never moved from his fire-side.
His temper was acid, petulant, and harsh. He was easily offended by
  trifles, respecting which, previously to the offence, the persons with whom
  he had intercourse could have no suspicion of such a result. When offended,
  his customary behaviour was exceedingly rugged. He thought only of setting
  the delinquent right, and humbling him for his error; and, in his eagerness
  to do this, overlooked the sensibility of the sufferer, and the pains he
  inflicted. Remonstrance in such a case he regarded as the offspring of
  cowardice, which was to be extirpated with a steady and unshrinking hand,
  and not soothed with misjudging kindness and indulgence. As is usual in
  human character, he had formed a system of thinking to suit the current of
  his feelings. He held that the kindness we entertain for a man should be
  veiled and concealed, exerted in substantial benefits, but not disclosed,
  lest an undue advantage should be taken of it by its object.
With this rugged outside, Mr. Forester had a warm and generous heart. At
  first sight all men were deterred by his manner, and excited to give him an
  ill character. But the longer any one knew him, the more they approved him.
  His harshness was then only considered as habit; and strong sense and active
  benevolence were uppermost in the recollection of his familiar acquaintance.
  His conversation, when he condescended to lay aside his snappish, rude, and
  abrupt half-sentences, became flowing in diction, and uncommonly amusing
  with regard to its substance. He combined, with weightiness of expression, a
  dryness of characteristic humour, that demonstrated at once the vividness of
  his observation, and the force of his understanding. The peculiarities of
  this gentleman's character were not undisplayed in the scene to which he was
  now introduced. Having much kindness in his disposition, he soon became
  deeply interested in the unhappiness of his relation. He did every thing in
  his power to remove it; but his attempts were rude and unskilful. With a
  mind so accomplished and a spirit so susceptible as that of Mr. Falkland,
  Mr. Forester did not venture to let loose his usual violence of manner; but,
  if he carefully abstained from harshness, he was however wholly incapable of
  that sweet and liquid eloquence of the soul, which would perhaps have stood
  the fairest chance of seducing Mr. Falkland for a moment to forget his
  anguish. He exhorted his host to rouse up his spirit, and defy the foul
  fiend; but the tone of his exhortations found no sympathetic chord in the
  mind of my patron. He had not the skill to carry conviction to an
  understanding so well fortified in error. In a word, after a thousand
  efforts of kindness to his entertainer, he drew off his forces, growling and
  dissatisfied with his own impotence, rather than angry at the obstinacy of
  Mr. Falkland. He felt no diminution of his affection for him, and was
  sincerely grieved to find that he was so little capable of serving him. Both
  parties in this case did justice to the merits of the other; at the same
  time that the disparity of their humours was such, as to prevent the
  stranger from being in any degree a dangerous companion to the master of the
  house. They had scarcely one point of contact in their characters. Mr.
  Forester was incapable of giving Mr. Falkland that degree either of pain or
  pleasure, which can raise the soul into a tumult, and deprive it for a while
  of tranquillity and self-command.
Our visitor was a man, notwithstanding appearances, of a peculiarly
  sociable disposition, and, where he was neither interrupted nor
  contradicted, considerably loquacious. He began to feel himself painfully
  out of his element upon the present occasion. Mr. Falkland was devoted to
  contemplation and solitude. He put upon himself some degree of restraint
  upon the arrival of his kinsman, though even then his darling habits would
  break out. But when they had seen each other a certain number of times, and
  it was sufficiently evident that the society of either would be a burthen
  rather than a pleasure to the other, they consented, by a sort of silent
  compact, that each should be at liberty to follow his own inclination. Mr.
  Falkland was, in a sense, the greatest gainer by this. He returned to the
  habits of his choice, and acted, as nearly as possible, just as he would
  have done if Mr. Forester had not been in existence. But the latter was
  wholly at a loss. He had all the disadvantages of retirement, without being
  able, as he might have done at his house, to bring his own associates or his
  own amusements about him.
In this situation he cast his eyes upon me. It was his principle to do
  every thing that his thoughts suggested, without caring for the forms of the
  world. He saw no reason why a peasant, with certain advantages of education
  and opportunity, might not be as eligible a companion as a lord; at the same
  time that he was deeply impressed with the venerableness of old
  institutions. Reduced as he was to a kind of last resort, he found me better
  qualified for his purpose than any other of Mr. Falkland's household.
The manner in which he began this sort of correspondence was sufficiently
  characteristical. It was abrupt; but it was strongly stamped with essential
  benevolence. It was blunt and humorous; but there was attractiveness,
  especially in a case of unequal intercourse, in that very rusticity by which
  he levelled himself with the mass of his species. He had to reconcile
  himself as well as to invite me; not to reconcile himself to the postponing
  an aristocratical vanity, for of that he had a very slender portion, but to
  the trouble of invitation, for he loved his ease. All this produced some
  irregularity and indecision in his own mind, and gave a whimsical impression
  to his behaviour.
On my part, I was by no means ungrateful for the distinction that was
  paid me. My mind had been relaxed into temporary dejection, but my reserve
  had no alloy of moroseness or insensibility. It did not long hold out
  against the condescending attentions of Mr. Forester. I became gradually
  heedful, encouraged, confiding. I had a most eager thirst for the knowledge
  of mankind; and though no person perhaps ever purchased so dearly the
  instructions he received in that school, the inclination was in no degree
  diminished. Mr. Forester was the second man I had seen uncommonly worthy of
  my analysis, and who seemed to my thoughts, arrived as I was at the end of
  my first essay, almost as much deserving to be studied as Mr. Falkland
  himself. I was glad to escape from the uneasiness of my reflections; and,
  while engaged with this new friend, I forgot the criticalness of the evils
  with which I was hourly menaced.
Stimulated by these feelings, I was what Mr. Forester wanted, a diligent
  and zealous hearer, I was strongly susceptible of impression; and the
  alternate impressions my mind received, visibly displayed themselves in my
  countenance and gestures. The observations Mr. Forester had made in his
  travels, the set of opinions he had formed, all amused and interested me.
  His manner of telling a story, or explaining his thoughts, was forcible,
  perspicuous, and original: his style in conversation had an uncommon zest.
  Every thing he had to relate delighted me; while, in return, my sympathy, my
  eager curiosity, and my unsophisticated passions, rendered me to Mr.
  Forester a most desirable hearer. It is not to be wondered at, therefore,
  that every day rendered our intercourse more intimate and cordial.
Mr. Falkland was destined to be for ever unhappy; and it seemed as if no
  new incident could occur, from which he was not able to extract food for
  this imperious propensity. He was wearied with a perpetual repetition of
  similar impressions; and entertained an invincible disgust against all that
  was new. The visit of Mr. Forester he regarded with antipathy. He was
  scarcely able to look at him without shuddering; an emotion which his guest
  perceived, and pitied as the result of habit and disease, rather than of
  judgment. None of his actions passed unremarked; the most indifferent
  excited uneasiness and apprehension. The first overtures of intimacy between
  me and Mr. Forester probably gave birth to sentiments of jealousy in the
  mind of my master. The irregular, variable character of his visitor tended
  to heighten them, by producing an appearance of inexplicableness and
  mystery. At this time he intimated to me that it was not agreeable to him,
  that there should be much intercourse between me and this gentleman.
What could I do? Young as I was, could it be expected that I should play
  the philosopher, and put a perpetual curb upon my inclinations? Imprudent
  though I had been, could I voluntarily subject myself to an eternal penance,
  and estrangement from human society? Could I discourage a frankness so
  perfectly in consonance with my wishes, and receive in an ungracious way a
  kindness that stole away my heart?
Besides this, I was but ill prepared for the servile submission Mr.
  Falkland demanded. In early life I had been accustomed to be much my own
  master. When I first entered into Mr. Falkland's service, my personal habits
  were checked by the novelty of my situation, and my affections were gained
  by the high accomplishments of my patron. To novelty and its influence,
  curiosity had succeeded: curiosity, so long as it lasted, was a principle
  stronger in my bosom than even the love of independence. To that I would
  have sacrificed my liberty or my life; to gratify it, I would have submitted
  to the condition of a West Indian negro, or to the tortures inflicted by
  North American savages. But the turbulence of curiosity had now
  subsided.
As long as the threats of Mr. Falkland had been confined to generals, I
  endured it. I was conscious of the unbecoming action I had committed, and
  this rendered me humble. But, when he went further, and undertook to
  prescribe to every article of my conduct, my patience was at an end. My
  mind, before sufficiently sensible to the unfortunate situation to which my
  imprudence had reduced me, now took a nearer and a more alarming view of the
  circumstances of the case. Mr. Falkland was not an old man; he had in him
  the principles of vigour, however they might seem to be shaken; he might
  live as long as I should. I was his prisoner; and what a prisoner! All my
  actions observed; all my gestures marked. I could move neither to the right
  nor the left, but the eye of my keeper was upon me. He watched me; and his
  vigilance was a sickness to my heart. For me there was no more freedom, no
  more of hilarity, of thoughtlessness, or of youth. Was this the life upon
  which I had entered with such warm and sanguine expectation? Were my days to
  be wasted in this cheerless gloom; a galley-slave in the hands of the system
  of nature, whom death only, the death of myself or my inexorable superior,
  could free?
I had been adventurous in the gratification of an infantine and
  unreasonable curiosity; and I resolved not to be less adventurous, if need
  were, in the defence of every thing that can make life a blessing. I was
  prepared for an amicable adjustment of interests: I would undertake that Mr.
  Falkland should never sustain injury through my means; but I expected in
  return that I should suffer no encroachment, but be left to the direction of
  my own understanding.
I went on, then, to seek Mr. Forester's society with eagerness; and it is
  the nature of an intimacy that does not decline, progressively to increase.
  Mr. Falkland observed these symptoms with visible perturbation. Whenever I
  was conscious of their being perceived by him, I betrayed tokens of
  confusion: this did not tend to allay his uneasiness. One day he spoke to me
  alone; and, with a look of mysterious but terrible import, expressed himself
  thus:—
"Young man, take warning! Perhaps this is the last time you shall have an
  opportunity to take it! I will not always be the butt of your simplicity and
  inexperience, nor suffer your weakness to triumph over my strength! Why do
  you trifle with me? You little suspect the extent of my power. At this
  moment you are enclosed with the snares of my vengeance unseen by you, and,
  at the instant that you flatter yourself you are already beyond their reach,
  they will close upon you. You might as well think of escaping from the power
  of the omnipresent God, as from mine! If you could touch so much as my
  finger, you should expiate it in hours and months and years of a torment, of
  which as yet you have not the remotest idea. Remember! I am not talking at
  random! I do not utter a word, that, if you provoke me, shall not be
  executed to the severest letter!"
It may be supposed that these menaces were not without their effect. I
  withdrew in silence. My whole soul revolted against the treatment I endured,
  and yet I could not utter a word. Why could not I speak the expostulations
  of my heart, or propose the compromise I meditated? It was inexperience, and
  not want of strength, that awed me. Every act of Mr. Falkland contained
  something new, and I was unprepared to meet it. Perhaps it will be found
  that the greatest hero owes the propriety of his conduct to the habit of
  encountering difficulties, and calling out with promptness the energies of
  his mind.
I contemplated the proceedings of my patron with the deepest
  astonishment. Humanity and general kindness were fundamental parts of his
  character; but in relation to me they were sterile and inactive. His own
  interest required that he should purchase my kindness; but he preferred to
  govern me by terror, and watch me with unceasing anxiety. I ruminated with
  the most mournful sensations upon the nature of my calamity. I believed that
  no human being was ever placed in a situation so pitiable as mine. Every
  atom of my frame seemed to have a several existence, and to crawl within me.
  I had but too much reason to believe that Mr. Falkland's threats were not
  empty words. I knew his ability; I felt his ascendancy. If I encountered
  him, what chance had I of victory? If I were defeated, what was the penalty
  I had to suffer? Well then, the rest of my life must be devoted to slavish
  subjection. Miserable sentence! And, if it were, what security had I against
  the injustice of a man, vigilant, capricious, and criminal? I envied the
  condemned wretch upon the scaffold; I envied the victim of the inquisition
  in the midst of his torture. They know what they have to suffer. I had only
  to imagine every thing terrible, and then say, "The fate reserved for me is
  worse than this!"
It was well for me that these sensations were transient: human nature
  could not long support itself under what I then felt. By degrees my mind
  shook off its burthen. Indignation succeeded to emotions of terror. The
  hostility of Mr. Falkland excited hostility in me. I determined I would
  never calumniate him in matters of the most trivial import, much less betray
  the grand secret upon which every thing dear to him depended. But, totally
  abjuring the offensive, I resolved to stand firmly upon the defensive. The
  liberty of acting as I pleased I would preserve, whatever might be the risk.
  If I were worsted in the contest, I would at least have the consolation of
  reflecting that I had exerted myself with energy. In proportion as I thus
  determined, I drew off my forces from petty incursions, and felt the
  propriety of acting with premeditation and system. I ruminated incessantly
  upon plans of deliverance, but I was anxious that my choice should not be
  precipitately made.
It was during this period of my deliberation and uncertainty that Mr.
  Forester terminated his visit. He observed a strange distance in my
  behaviour, and, in his good-natured, rough way, reproached me for it. I
  could only answer with a gloomy look of mysterious import, and a mournful
  and expressive silence. He sought me for an explanation, but I was now as
  ingenious in avoiding as I had before been ardent to seek him; and he
  quitted our house, as he afterwards told me, with an impression, that there
  was some ill destiny that hung over it, which seemed fated to make all its
  inhabitants miserable, without its being possible for a bystander to
  penetrate the reason.

</div></body></text></TEI>