<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="38">CHAPTER X.
I procured a new lodging. By some bias of the mind, it may be, gratifying
  itself with images of peril, I inclined to believe that Mrs. Marney's alarm
  had not been without foundation. I was however unable to conjecture through
  what means danger had approached me; and had therefore only the
  unsatisfactory remedy of redoubling my watch upon all my actions. Still I
  had the joint considerations pressing upon me of security and subsistence. I
  had some small remains of the produce of my former industry; but this was
  but small, for my employer was in arrear with me, and I did not choose in
  any method to apply to him for payment. The anxieties of my mind, in spite
  of all my struggles, preyed upon my health. I did not consider myself as in
  safety for an instant. My appearance was wasted to a shadow; and I started
  at every sound that was unexpected. Sometimes I was half tempted to resign
  myself into the hands of the law, and brave its worst; but resentment and
  indignation at those times speedily flowed back upon my mind, and
  re-animated my perseverance.
I knew no better resource with respect to subsistence than that I had
  employed in the former instance, of seeking some third person to stand
  between me and the disposal of my industry. I might find an individual ready
  to undertake this office in my behalf; but where should I find the
  benevolent soul of Mrs. Marney? The person I fixed upon was a Mr. Spurrel, a
  man who took in work from the watchmakers, and had an apartment upon our
  second floor. I examined him two or three times with irresolute glances, as
  we passed upon the stairs, before I would venture to accost him. He observed
  this, and at length kindly invited me into his apartment.
Being seated, he condoled with me upon my seeming bad health, and the
  solitary mode of my living, and wished to know whether he could be of any
  service to me. "From the first moment he saw me, he had conceived an
  affection for me." In my present disguise I appeared twisted and deformed,
  and in other respects by no means an object of attraction. But it seemed Mr.
  Spurrel had lost an only son about six months before, and I was "the very
  picture of him." If I had put off my counterfeited ugliness, I should
  probably have lost all hold upon his affections. "He was now an old man," as
  he observed, "just dropping into the grave, and his son had been his only
  consolation. The poor lad was always ailing, but he had been a nurse to him;
  and the more tending he required while he was alive, the more he missed him
  now he was dead. Now he had not a friend, nor any body that cared for him,
  in the whole world. If I pleased, I should be instead of that son to him,
  and he would treat me in all respects with the same attention and
  kindness."
I expressed my sense of these benevolent offers, but told him that I
  should be sorry to be in any way burthensome to him. "My ideas at present
  led me to a private and solitary life, and my chief difficulty was to
  reconcile this with some mode of earning necessary subsistence. If he would
  condescend to lend me his assistance in smoothing this difficulty, it would
  be the greatest benefit he could confer on me." I added, that "my mind had
  always had a mechanical and industrious turn, and that I did not doubt of
  soon mastering any craft to which I seriously applied myself. I had not been
  brought up to any trade; but, if he would favour me with his instructions, I
  would work with him as long as he pleased for a bare subsistence. I knew
  that I was asking of him an extraordinary kindness; but I was urged on the
  one hand by the most extreme necessity, and encouraged on the other by the
  persuasiveness of his friendly professions."
The old man dropped some tears over my apparent distress, and readily
  consented to every thing I proposed. Our agreement was soon made, and I
  entered upon my functions accordingly. My new friend was a man of a singular
  turn of mind. Love of money, and a charitable officiousness of demeanour,
  were his leading characteristics. He lived in the most penurious manner, and
  denied himself every indulgence. I entitled myself almost immediately, as he
  frankly acknowledged, to some remuneration for my labours, and accordingly
  he insisted upon my being paid. He did not however, as some persons would
  have done under the circumstance, pay me the whole amount of my earnings,
  but professed to subtract from them twenty per cent, as an equitable
  consideration for instruction, and commission-money in procuring me a
  channel for my industry. Yet he frequently shed tears over me, was uneasy in
  every moment of our indispensable separation, and exhibited perpetual tokens
  of attachment and fondness. I found him a man of excellent mechanical
  contrivance, and received considerable pleasure from his communications. My
  own sources of information were various; and he frequently expressed his
  wonder and delight in the contemplation of my powers, as well of amusement
  as exertion.
Thus I appeared to have attained a situation not less eligible than in my
  connection with Mrs. Marney. I was however still more unhappy. My fits of
  despondence were deeper, and of more frequent recurrence. My health every
  day grew worse; and Mr. Spurrel was not without apprehensions that he should
  lose me, as he before lost his only son.
I had not been long however in this new situation, before an incident
  occurred which filled me with greater alarm and apprehension than ever. I
  was walking out one evening, after a long visitation of languor, for an
  hour's exercise and air, when my ears were struck with two or three casual
  sounds from the mouth of a hawker who was bawling his wares. I stood still
  to inform myself more exactly, when, to my utter astonishment and confusion,
  I heard him deliver himself nearly in these words: "Here you have the
  MOST WONDERFUL AND SURPRISING HISTORY AND MIRACULOUS ADVENTURES OF CALEB
  WILLIAMS: you are informed how he first robbed, and then brought false
  accusations against his master; as also of his attempting divers times to
  break out of prison, till at last he effected his escape in the most
  wonderful and uncredible manner; as also of his travelling the kingdom in
  various disguises, and the robberies he committed with a most desperate and
  daring gang of thieves; and of his coming up to London, where it is supposed
  he now lies concealed; with a true and faithful copy of the hue and cry
  printed and published by one of his Majesty's most principal secretaries of
  state, offering a reward of one hundred guineas for apprehending him. All
  for the price of one halfpenny."
Petrified as I was at these amazing and dreadful sounds, I had the
  temerity to go up to the man and purchase one of his papers. I was
  desperately resolved to know the exact state of the fact, and what I had to
  depend upon. I carried it with me a little way, till, no longer able to
  endure the tumult of my impatience, I contrived to make out the chief part
  of its contents, by the help of a lamp, at the upper end of a narrow
  passage. I found it contain a greater number of circumstances than could
  have been expected in this species of publication, I was equalled to the
  most notorious housebreaker in the art of penetrating through walls and
  doors, and to the most accomplished swindler in plausibleness, duplicity,
  and disguise. The hand-bill which Larkins had first brought to us upon the
  forest was printed at length. All my disguises, previously to the last alarm
  that had been given me by the providence of Mrs. Marney, were faithfully
  enumerated; and the public were warned to be upon their watch against a
  person of an uncouth and extraordinary appearance, and who lived in a
  recluse and solitary manner. I also learned from this paper that my former
  lodgings had been searched on the very evening of my escape, and that Mrs.
  Marney had been sent to Newgate, upon a charge of misprision of
  felony.—This last circumstance affected me deeply. In the midst of my
  own sufferings my sympathies flowed undiminished. It was a most cruel and
  intolerable idea, if I were not only myself to be an object of unrelenting
  persecution, but my very touch were to be infectious, and every one that
  succoured me was to be involved in the common ruin. My instant feeling was
  that of a willingness to undergo the utmost malice of my enemies, could I by
  that means have saved this excellent woman from alarm and peril.—I
  afterwards learned that Mrs. Marney was delivered from confinement, by the
  interposition of her noble relation.
My sympathy for Mrs. Marney however was at this moment a transient one. A
  more imperious and irresistible consideration demanded to be heard.
With what sensations did I ruminate upon this paper? Every word of it
  carried despair to my heart. The actual apprehension that I dreaded would
  perhaps have been less horrible. It would have put an end to that lingering
  terror to which I was a prey. Disguise was no longer of use. A numerous
  class of individuals, through every department, almost every house of the
  metropolis, would be induced to look with a suspicious eye upon every
  stranger, especially every solitary stranger, that fell under their
  observation. The prize of one hundred guineas was held out to excite their
  avarice and sharpen their penetration. It was no longer Bow-street, it was a
  million of men in arms against me. Neither had I the refuge, which few men
  have been so miserable as to want, of one single individual with whom to
  repose my alarms, and who might shelter me from the gaze of indiscriminate
  curiosity.
What could exceed the horrors of this situation? My heart knocked against
  my ribs, my bosom heaved, I gasped and panted for breath. "There is no end
  then," said I, "to my persecutors! My unwearied and long-continued labours
  lead to no termination! Termination! No; the lapse of time, that cures all
  other things, makes my case more desperate! Why then," exclaimed I, a new
  train of thought suddenly rushing into my mind, "why should I sustain the
  contest any longer? I can at least elude my persecutors in death. I can bury
  myself and the traces of my existence together in friendly oblivion; and
  thus bequeath eternal doubt, and ever new alarm, to those who have no peace
  but in pursuing me!"
In the midst of the horrors with which I was now impressed, this idea
  gave me pleasure; and I hastened to the Thames to put it in instant
  execution. Such was the paroxysm of my mind that my powers of vision became
  partially suspended. I was no longer conscious to the feebleness of disease,
  but rushed along with fervent impetuosity. I passed from street to street
  without observing what direction I pursued. After wandering I know not how
  long, I arrived at London Bridge. I hastened to the stairs, and saw the
  river covered with vessels.
"No human being must see me," said I, "at the instant that I vanish for
  ever." This thought required some consideration. A portion of time had
  elapsed since my first desperate purpose. My understanding began to return.
  The sight of the vessels suggested to me the idea of once more attempting to
  leave my native country.
I enquired, and speedily found that the cheapest passage I could procure
  was in a vessel moored near the Tower, and which was to sail in a few days
  for Middleburgh in Holland. I would have gone instantly on board, and have
  endeavoured to prevail with the captain to let me remain there till he
  sailed; but unfortunately I had not money enough in my pocket to defray my
  passage.
It was worse than this. I had not money enough in the world. I however
  paid the captain half his demand, and promised to return with the rest. I
  knew not in what manner it was to be procured, but I believed that I should
  not fail in it. I had some idea of applying to Mr. Spurrel. Surely he would
  not refuse me? He appeared to love me with parental affection, and I thought
  I might trust myself for a moment in his hands.
I approached my place of residence with a heavy and foreboding heart. Mr.
  Spurrel was not at home; and I was obliged to wait for his return. Worn out
  with fatigue, disappointment, and the ill state of my health, I sunk upon a
  chair. Speedily however I recollected myself. I had work of Mr. Spurrel's in
  my trunk, which had been delivered out to me that very morning, to five
  times the amount I wanted. I canvassed for a moment whether I should make
  use of this property as if it were my own; but I rejected the idea with
  disdain. I had never in the smallest degree merited the reproaches that were
  east upon me; and I determined I never would merit them. I sat gasping,
  anxious, full of the blackest forebodings. My terrors appeared, even to my
  own mind, greater and more importunate than the circumstances
  authorised.
It was extraordinary that Mr. Spurrel should be abroad at this hour; I
  had never known it happen before. His bed-time was between nine and ten. Ten
  o'clock came, eleven o'clock, but not Mr. Spurrel. At midnight I heard his
  knock at the door. Every soul in the house was in bed. Mr. Spurrel, on
  account of his regular hours, was unprovided with a key to open for himself.
  A gleam, a sickly gleam, of the social spirit came over my heart. I flew
  nimbly down stairs, and opened the door.
I could perceive, by the little taper in my hand, something extraordinary
  in his countenance. I had not time to speak, before I saw two other men
  follow him. At the first glance I was sufficiently assured what sort of
  persons they were. At the second, I perceived that one of them was no other
  than Gines himself. I had understood formerly that he had been of this
  profession, and I was not surprised to find him in it again. Though I had
  for three hours endeavoured, as it were, to prepare myself for the
  unavoidable necessity of falling once again into the hands of the officers
  of law, the sensation I felt at their entrance was indescribably agonising.
  I was besides not a little astonished at the time and manner of their
  entrance; and I felt anxious to know whether Mr. Spurrel could be base
  enough to have been their introducer.
I was not long held in perplexity. He no sooner saw his followers within
  the door, than he exclaimed, with convulsive eagerness, "There, there, that
  is your man! thank God! thank God!" Gines looked eagerly in my face, with a
  countenance expressive alternately of hope and doubt, and answered, "By God,
  and I do not know whether it be or no! I am afraid we are in the wrong box!"
  Then recollecting himself, "We will go into the house, and examine further
  however." We all went up stairs into Mr. Spurrel's room; I set down the
  candle upon the table. I had hitherto been silent; but I determined not to
  desert myself, and was a little encouraged to exertion by the scepticism of
  Gines. With a calm and deliberate manner therefore, in my feigned voice, one
  of the characteristics of which was lisping, I asked, "Pray, gentlemen, what
  may be your pleasure with me?"—"Why," said Gines, "our errand is with
  one Caleb Williams, and a precious rascal he is! I ought to know the chap
  well enough; but they say he has as many faces as there are days in the
  year. So you please to pull off your face; or, if you cannot do that, at
  least you can pull off your clothes, and let us see what your hump is made
  of."
I remonstrated, but in vain. I stood detected in part of my artifice; and
  Gines, though still uncertain, was every moment more and more confirmed in
  his suspicions. Mr. Spurrel perfectly gloated, with eyes that seemed ready
  to devour every thing that passed. As my imposture gradually appeared more
  palpable, he repeated his exclamation, "Thank God! thank God!" At last,
  tired with this scene of mummery, and disgusted beyond measure with the base
  and hypocritical figure I seemed to exhibit, I exclaimed, "Well, I am Caleb
  Williams; conduct me wherever you please! And now, Mr. Spurrel!"—He
  gave a violent start. The instant I declared myself his transport had been
  at the highest, and was, to any power he was able to exert, absolutely
  uncontrollable. But the unexpectedness of my address, and the tone in which
  I spoke, electrified him.—"Is it possible," continued I, "that you
  should have been the wretch to betray me? What have I done to deserve this
  treatment? Is this the kindness you professed? the affection that was
  perpetually in your mouth? to be the death of me!"
"My poor boy! my dear creature!" cried Spurrel, whimpering, and in a tone
  of the humblest expostulation, "indeed I could not help it! I would have
  helped it, if I could! I hope they will not hurt my darling! I am sure I
  shall die if they do!"
"Miserable driveller!" interrupted I, with a stern voice, "do you betray
  me into the remorseless fangs of the law, and then talk of my not being
  hurt? I know my sentence, and am prepared to meet it! You have fixed the
  halter upon my neck, and at the same price would have done so to your only
  son! Go, count your accursed guineas! My life would have been safer in the
  hands of one I had never seen than in yours, whose mouth and whose eyes for
  ever ran over with crocodile affection!"
I have always believed that my sickness, and, as he apprehended,
  approaching death, contributed its part to the treachery of Mr. Spurrel. He
  predicted to his own mind the time when I should no longer be able to work.
  He recollected with agony the expense that attended his son's illness and
  death. He determined to afford me no assistance of a similar kind. He feared
  however the reproach of deserting me. He feared the tenderness of his
  nature. He felt, that I was growing upon his affections, and that in a short
  time he could not have deserted me. He was driven by a sort of implicit
  impulse, for the sake of avoiding one ungenerous action, to take refuge in
  another, the basest and most diabolical. This motive, conjoining with the
  prospect of the proffered reward, was an incitement too powerful for him to
  resist.

</div></body></text></TEI>