<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="22">CHAPTER IX.
The first plan that had suggested itself to me was, to go to the nearest
  public road, and take the earliest stage for London. There I believed I
  should be most safe from discovery, if the vengeance of Mr. Falkland should
  prompt him to pursue me; and I did not doubt, among the multiplied resources
  of the metropolis, to find something which should suggest to me an eligible
  mode of disposing of my person and industry. I reserved Mr. Forester in my
  arrangement, as a last resource, not to be called forth unless for immediate
  protection from the hand of persecution and power. I was destitute of that
  experience of the world, which can alone render us fertile in resources, or
  enable us to institute a just comparison between the resources that offer
  themselves. I was like the fascinated animal, that is seized with the most
  terrible apprehensions, at the same time that he is incapable of adequately
  considering for his own safety.
The mode of my proceeding being digested, I traced, with a cheerful
  heart, the unfrequented path it was now necessary for me to pursue. The
  night was gloomy, and it drizzled with rain. But these were circumstances I
  had scarcely the power to perceive; all was sunshine and joy within me. I
  hardly felt the ground; I repeated to myself a thousand times, "I am free.
  What concern have I with danger and alarm? I feel that I am free; I feel
  that I will continue so. What power is able to hold in chains a mind ardent
  and determined? What power can cause that man to die, whose whole soul
  commands him to continue to live?" I looked back with abhorrence to the
  subjection in which I had been held. I did not hate the author of my
  misfortunes—truth and justice acquit me of that; I rather pitied the
  hard destiny to which he seemed condemned. But I thought with unspeakable
  loathing of those errors, in consequence of which every man is fated to be,
  more or less, the tyrant or the slave. I was astonished at the folly of my
  species, that they did not rise up as one man, and shake off chains so
  ignominious, and misery so insupportable. So far as related to myself, I
  resolved—and this resolution has never been entirely forgotten by
  me—to hold myself disengaged from this odious scene, and never fill
  the part either of the oppressor or the sufferer. My mind continued in this
  enthusiastical state, full of confidence, and accessible only to such a
  portion of fear as served rather to keep up a state of pleasurable emotion
  than to generate anguish and distress, during the whole of this nocturnal
  expedition. After a walk of three hours, I arrived, without accident, at the
  village from which I hoped to have taken my passage for the metropolis. At
  this early hour every thing was quiet; no sound of any thing human saluted
  my ear. It was with difficulty that I gained admittance into the yard of the
  inn, where I found a single ostler taking care of some horses. From him I
  received the unwelcome tidings, that the coach was not expected till six
  o'clock in the morning of the day after to-morrow, its route through that
  town recurring only three times a week.
This intelligence gave the first check to the rapturous inebriation by
  which my mind had been possessed from the moment I quitted the habitation of
  Mr. Falkland. The whole of my fortune in ready cash consisted of about
  eleven guineas. I had about fifty more, that had fallen to me from the
  disposal of my property at the death of my father; but that was so vested as
  to preclude it from immediate use, and I even doubted whether it would not
  be found better ultimately to resign it, than, by claiming it, to risk the
  furnishing a clew to what I most of all dreaded, the persecution of Mr.
  Falkland. There was nothing I so ardently desired as the annihilation of all
  future intercourse between us, that he should not know there was such a
  person on the earth as myself, and that I should never more hear the
  repetition of a name which had been so fatal to my peace.
Thus circumstanced, I conceived frugality to be an object by no means
  unworthy of my attention, unable as I was to prognosticate what
  discouragements and delays might present themselves to the accomplishment of
  my wishes, after my arrival in London. For this and other reasons, I
  determined to adhere to my design of travelling by the stage; it only
  remaining for me to consider in what manner I should prevent the eventful
  delay of twenty-four hours from becoming, by any untoward event, a source of
  new calamity. It was by no means advisable to remain in the village where I
  now was during this interval; nor did I even think proper to employ it, in
  proceeding on foot along the great road. I therefore decided upon making a
  circuit, the direction of which should seem at first extremely wide of my
  intended route, and then, suddenly taking a different inclination, should
  enable me to arrive by the close of day at a market-town twelve miles nearer
  to the metropolis.
Having fixed the economy of the day, and persuaded myself that it was the
  best which, under the circumstances, could be adopted, I dismissed, for the
  most part, all further anxieties from my mind, and eagerly yielded myself up
  to the different amusements that arose. I rested and went forward at the
  impulse of the moment. At one time I reclined upon a bank immersed in
  contemplation, and at another exerted myself to analyse the prospects which
  succeeded each other. The haziness of the morning was followed by a
  spirit-stirring and beautiful day. With the ductility so characteristic of a
  youthful mind, I forgot the anguish which had lately been my continual
  guest, and occupied myself entirely in dreams of future novelty and
  felicity. I scarcely ever, in the whole course of my existence, spent a day
  of more various or exquisite gratification. It furnished a strong, and
  perhaps not an unsalutary contrast, to the terrors which had preceded, and
  the dreadful scenes that awaited me.
In the evening I arrived at the place of my destination, and enquired for
  the inn at which the coach was accustomed to call. A circumstance however
  had previously excited my attention, and reproduced in me a state of
  alarm.
Though it was already dark before I reached the town, my observation had
  been attracted by a man, who passed me on horseback in the opposite
  direction, about half a mile on the other side of the town. There was an
  inquisitiveness in his gesture that I did not like; and, as far as I could
  discern his figure, I pronounced him an ill-looking man. He had not passed
  me more than two minutes before I heard the sound of a horse advancing
  slowly behind me. These circumstances impressed some degree of uneasy
  sensation upon my mind. I first mended my pace; and, this not appearing to
  answer the purpose, I afterwards loitered, that the horseman might pass me.
  He did so; and, as I glanced at him, I thought I saw that it was the same
  man. He now put his horse into a trot, and entered the town. I followed; and
  it was not long before I perceived him at the door of an alehouse, drinking
  a mug of beer. This however the darkness prevented me from discovering, till
  I was in a manner upon him. I pushed forward, and saw him no more, till, as
  I entered the yard of the inn where I intended to sleep, the same man
  suddenly rode up to me, and asked if my name were Williams.
This adventure, while it had been passing, expelled the gaiety of
  my mind, and filled me with anxiety. The apprehension however that I felt,
  appeared to me groundless: if I were pursued, I took it for granted it would
  be by some of Mr. Falkland's people, and not by a stranger. The darkness
  took from me some of the simplest expedients of precaution. I determined at
  least to proceed to the inn, and make the necessary enquiries.
I no sooner heard the sound of the horse as I entered the yard, and the
  question proposed to me by the rider, than the dreadful certainty of what I
  feared instantly took possession of my mind. Every incident connected with
  my late abhorred situation was calculated to impress me with the deepest
  alarm. My first thought was, to betake myself to the fields, and trust to
  the swiftness of my flight for safety. But this was scarcely practicable: I
  remarked that my enemy was alone; and I believed that, man to man, I might
  reasonably hope to get the better of him, either by the firmness of my
  determination, or the subtlety of my invention.
Thus resolved, I replied in an impetuous and peremptory tone, that I was
  the man he took me for; adding, "I guess your errand; but it is to no
  purpose. You come to conduct me back to Falkland House; but no force shall
  ever drag me to that place alive. I have not taken my resolution without
  strong reasons; and all the world shall not persuade me to alter it. I am an
  Englishman, and it is the privilege of an Englishman to be sole judge and
  master of his own actions."
"You are in the devil of a hurry," replied the man, "to guess my
  intentions, and tell your own. But your guess is right; and mayhap you may
  have reason to be thankful that my errand is not something worse. Sure
  enough the squire expects you;—but I have a letter, and when you have
  read that, I suppose you will come off a little of your stoutness. If that
  does not answer, it will then be time to think what is to be done next."
Thus saying, he gave me his letter, which was from Mr. Forester, whom, as
  he told me, he had left at Mr. Falkland's house. I went into a room of the
  inn for the purpose of reading it, and was followed by the bearer. The
  letter was as follows:—
WILLIAMS,
"My brother Falkland has sent the bearer in pursuit of you. He expects
  that, if found, you will return with him: I expect it too. It is of the
  utmost consequence to your future honour and character. After reading these
  lines, if you are a villain and a rascal, you will perhaps endeavour to fly;
  if your conscience tells you, you are innocent, you will, out of all doubt,
  come back. Show me then whether I have been your dupe: and, while I was won
  over by your seeming ingenuousness, have suffered myself to be made the tool
  of a designing knave. If you come, I pledge myself that, if you clear your
  reputation, you shall not only be free to go wherever you please, but shall
  receive every assistance in my power to give. Remember, I engage for nothing
  further than that.
"VALENTINE FORESTER."
What a letter was this! To a mind like mine, glowing with the love of
  virtue, such an address was strong enough to draw the person to whom it was
  addressed from one end of the earth to the other. My mind was full of
  confidence and energy. I felt my own innocence, and was determined to assert
  it. I was willing to be driven out a fugitive; I even rejoiced in my escape,
  and cheerfully went out into the world destitute of every provision, and
  depending for my future prospects upon my own ingenuity.
Thus much, said I, Falkland! you may do. Dispose of me as you please with
  respect to the goods of fortune; but you shall neither make prize of my
  liberty, nor sully the whiteness of my name. I repassed in my thoughts every
  memorable incident that had happened to me under his roof. I could recollect
  nothing, except the affair of the mysterious trunk, out of which the shadow
  of a criminal accusation could be extorted. In that instance my conduct had
  been highly reprehensible, and I had never looked back upon it without
  remorse and self-condemnation. But I did not believe that it was of the
  nature of those actions which can be brought under legal censure. I could
  still less persuade myself that Mr. Falkland, who shuddered at the very
  possibility of detection, and who considered himself as completely in my
  power, would dare to bring forward a subject so closely connected with the
  internal agony of his soul. In a word, the more I reflected on the phrases
  of Mr. Forester's billet, the less could I imagine the nature of those
  scenes to which they were to serve as a prelude.
The inscrutableness however of the mystery they contained, did not
  suffice to overwhelm my courage. My mind seemed to undergo an entire
  revolution. Timid and embarrassed as I had felt myself, when I regarded Mr.
  Falkland as my clandestine and domestic foe, I now conceived that the case
  was entirely altered. "Meet me," said I, "as an open accuser: if we must
  contend, let us contend in the face of day; and then, unparalleled as your
  resources may be, I will not fear you." Innocence and guilt were, in my
  apprehension, the things in the whole world the most opposite to each other.
  I would not suffer myself to believe, that the former could be confounded
  with the latter, unless the innocent man first allowed himself to be subdued
  in mind, before he was defrauded of the good opinion of mankind. Virtue
  rising superior to every calamity, defeating by a plain unvarnished tale all
  the stratagems of Vice, and throwing back upon her adversary the confusion
  with which he had hoped to overwhelm her, was one of the favourite subjects
  of my youthful reveries. I determined never to prove an instrument of
  destruction to Mr. Falkland; but I was not less resolute to obtain justice
  to myself.
The issue of all these confident hopes I shall immediately have occasion
  to relate. It was thus, with the most generous and undoubting spirit, that I
  rushed upon irretrievable ruin.
"Friend," said I to the bearer, after a considerable interval of silence,
  "you are right. This is, indeed, an extraordinary letter you have brought
  me; but it answers its purpose. I will certainly go with you now, whatever
  be the consequence. No person shall ever impute blame to me, so long as I
  have it in my power to clear myself."
I felt, in the circumstances in which I was placed by Mr. Forester's
  letter, not merely a willingness, but an alacrity and impatience, to return.
  We procured a second horse. We proceeded on our journey in silence. My mind
  was occupied again in endeavouring to account for Mr. Forester's letter. I
  knew the inflexibility and sternness of Mr. Falkland's mind in accomplishing
  the purposes he had at heart; but I also knew that every virtuous and
  magnanimous principle was congenial to his character.
When we arrived, midnight was already past, and we were obliged to waken
  one of the servants to give us admittance. I found that Mr. Forester had
  left a message for me, in consideration of the possibility of my arrival
  during the night, directing me immediately to go to bed, and to take care
  that I did not come weary and exhausted to the business of the following
  day. I endeavoured to take his advice; but my slumbers were unrefreshing and
  disturbed. I suffered however no reduction of courage: the singularity of my
  situation, my conjectures with respect to the present, my eagerness for the
  future, did not allow me to sink into a languid and inactive state.
Next morning the first person I saw was Mr. Forester. He told me that he
  did not yet know what Mr. Falkland had to allege against me, for that he had
  refused to know. He had arrived at the house of his brother by appointment
  on the preceding day to settle some indispensable business, his intention
  having been to depart the moment the business was finished, as he knew that
  conduct on his part would be most agreeable to Mr. Falkland. But he was no
  sooner come, than he found the whole house in confusion, the alarm of my
  elopement having been given a few hours before. Mr. Falkland had despatched
  servants in all directions in pursuit of me; and the servant from the
  market-town arrived at the same moment with Mr. Forester, with intelligence
  that a person answering the description he gave, had been there very early
  in the morning enquiring respecting the stage to London.
Mr. Falkland seemed extremely disturbed at this information, and
  exclaimed on me with acrimony, as an unthankful and unnatural villain.
Mr. Forester replied, "Have more command of yourself, sir! Villain is a
  serious appellation, and must not be trifled with. Englishmen are free; and
  no man is to be charged with villainy, because he changes one source of
  subsistence for another."
Mr. Falkland shook his head, and with a smile, expressive of acute
  sensibility, said, "Brother, brother, you are the dupe of his art. I always
  considered him with an eye of suspicion, and was aware of his depravity. But
  I have just discovered—"
"Stop, sir!" interrupted Mr. Forester. "I own I thought that, in a moment
  of acrimony, you might be employing harsh epithets in a sort of random
  style. But if you have a serious accusation to state, we must not be told of
  that, till it is known whether the lad is within reach of a hearing. I am
  indifferent myself about the good opinion of others. It is what the world
  bestows and retracts with so little thought, that I can make no account of
  its decision. But that does not authorise me lightly to entertain an ill
  opinion of another. The slenderest allowance I think I can make to such as I
  consign to be the example and terror of their species, is that of being
  heard in their own defence. It is a wise principle that requires the judge
  to come into court uninformed of the merits of the cause he is to try; and
  to that principle I am determined to conform as an individual. I shall
  always think it right to be severe and inflexible in my treatment of
  offenders; but the severity I exercise in the sequel, must be accompanied
  with impartiality and caution in what is preliminary."
While Mr. Forester related to me these particulars, he observed me ready
  to break out into some of the expressions which the narrative suggested; but
  he would not suffer me to speak. "No," said he; "I would not hear Mr.
  Falkland against you; and I cannot hear you in your defence. I come to you
  at present to speak, and not to hear. I thought it right to warn you of your
  danger, but I have nothing more to do now. Reserve what you have to say to
  the proper time. Make the best story you can for yourself—true, if
  truth, as I hope, will serve your purpose; but, if not, the most plausible
  and ingenious you can invent. That is what self-defence requires from every
  man, where, as it always happens to a man upon his trial, he has the whole
  world against him, and has his own battle to fight against the world.
  Farewell; and God send you a good deliverance! If Mr. Falkland's accusation,
  whatever it be, shall appear premature, depend upon having me more zealously
  your friend than ever. If not, this is the last act of friendship you will
  ever receive from me!"
It may be believed that this address, so singular, so solemn, so big with
  conditional menace, did not greatly tend to encourage me. I was totally
  ignorant of the charge to be advanced against me; and not a little
  astonished, when it was in my power to be in the most formidable degree the
  accuser of Mr. Falkland, to find the principles of equity so completely
  reversed, as for the innocent but instructed individual to be the party
  accused and suffering, instead of having, as was natural, the real criminal
  at his mercy. I was still more astonished at the superhuman power Mr.
  Falkland seemed to possess, of bringing the object of his persecution within
  the sphere of his authority; a reflection attended with some check to that
  eagerness and boldness of spirit, which now constituted the ruling passion
  of my mind.
But this was no time for meditation. To the sufferer the course of events
  is taken out of his direction, and he is hurried along with an irresistible
  force, without finding it within the compass of his efforts to check their
  rapidity. I was allowed only a short time to recollect myself, when my trial
  commenced. I was conducted to the library, where I had passed so many happy
  and so many contemplative hours, and found there Mr. Forester and three or
  four of the servants already assembled, in expectation of me and my accuser.
  Every thing was calculated to suggest to me that I must trust only in the
  justice of the parties concerned, and had nothing to hope from their
  indulgence. Mr. Falkland entered at one door, almost as soon as I entered at
  the other.

</div></body></text></TEI>