<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="40">CHAPTER XII.
It was not long before I took my everlasting leave of this detested and
  miserable scene. My heart was for the present too full of astonishment and
  exultation in my unexpected deliverance, to admit of anxiety about the
  future. I withdrew from the town; I rambled with a slow and thoughtful pace,
  now bursting with exclamation, and now buried in profound and undefinable
  reverie. Accident led me towards the very heath which had first sheltered
  me, when, upon a former occasion, I broke out of my prison. I wandered among
  its cavities and its valleys. It was a forlorn and desolate solitude. I
  continued here I know not how long. Night at length overtook me unperceived,
  and I prepared to return for the present to the town I had quitted.
It was now perfectly dark, when two men, whom I had not previously
  observed, sprung upon me from behind. They seized me by the arms, and threw
  me upon the ground. I had no time for resistance or recollection. I could
  however perceive that one of them was the diabolical Gines. They
  blindfolded, gagged me, and hurried me I knew not whither. As we passed
  along in silence, I endeavoured to conjecture what could be the meaning of
  this extraordinary violence. I was strongly impressed with the idea, that,
  after the event of this morning, the most severe and painful part of my
  history was past; and, strange as it may seem, I could not persuade myself
  to regard with alarm this unexpected attack. It might however be some new
  project, suggested by the brutal temper and unrelenting animosity of
  Gines.
I presently found that we were returned into the town I had just quitted.
  They led me into a house, and, as soon as they had taken possession of a
  room freed me from the restraints they had before imposed Here Gines
  informed me with a malicious grin that no harm was intended me, and
  therefore I should show most sense in keeping myself quiet. I perceived that
  we were in an inn; I overheard company in a room at no great distance from
  us, and therefore was now as thoroughly aware as he could be, that there was
  at present little reason to stand in fear of any species of violence, and
  that it would be time enough to resist, when they attempted to conduct me
  from the inn in the same manner that they had brought me into it. I was not
  without some curiosity to see the conclusion that was to follow upon so
  extraordinary a commencement.
The preliminaries I have described were scarcely completed, before Mr.
  Falkland entered the room. I remember Collins, when he first communicated to
  me the particulars of our patron's history, observed that he was totally
  unlike the man he had once been. I had no means of ascertaining the truth of
  that observation. But it was strikingly applicable to the spectacle which
  now presented itself to my eyes, though, when I last beheld this unhappy
  man, he had been a victim to the same passions, a prey to the same undying
  remorse, as now. Misery was at that time inscribed in legible characters
  upon his countenance. But now he appeared like nothing that had ever been
  visible in human shape. His visage was haggard, emaciated, and fleshless.
  His complexion was a dun and tarnished red, the colour uniform through every
  region of the face, and suggested the idea of its being burnt and parched by
  the eternal fire that burned within him. His eyes were red, quick,
  wandering, full of suspicion and rage. His hair was neglected, ragged, and
  floating. His whole figure was thin, to a degree that suggested the idea
  rather of a skeleton than a person actually alive. Life seemed hardly to be
  the capable inhabitant of so woe-begone and ghost-like a figure. The taper
  of wholesome life was expired; but passion, and fierceness, and frenzy, were
  able for the present to supply its place.
I was to the utmost degree astonished and shocked at the sight of
  him.—He sternly commanded my conductors to leave the room.
"Well, sir, I have this day successfully exerted myself to save your life
  from the gallows. A fortnight ago you did what you were able to bring my
  life to that ignominious close.
"Were you so stupid and undistinguishing as not to know that the
  preservation of your life was the uniform object of my exertions? Did not I
  maintain you in prison? Did not I endeavour to prevent your being sent
  thither? Could you mistake the bigoted and obstinate conduct of Forester, in
  offering a hundred guineas for your apprehension, for mine?
"I had my eye upon you in all your wanderings. You have taken no material
  step through their whole course with which I have not been acquainted. I
  meditated to do you good. I have spilt no blood but that of Tyrrel: that was
  in the moment of passion; and it has been the subject of my uninterrupted
  and hourly remorse. I have connived at no man's fate but that of the
  Hawkinses: they could no otherwise have been saved, than by my acknowledging
  myself a murderer. The rest of my life has been spent in acts of
  benevolence.
"I meditated to do you good. For that reason I was willing to prove you.
  You pretended to act towards me with consideration and forbearance. If you
  had persisted in that to the end, I would yet have found a way to reward
  you. I left you to your own discretion. You might show the impotent
  malignity of your own heart; but, in the circumstances in which you were
  then placed, I knew you could not hurt me. Your forbearance has proved, as I
  all along suspected, empty and treacherous. You have attempted to blast my
  reputation. You have sought to disclose the select and eternal secret of my
  soul. Because you have done that, I will never forgive you. I will remember
  it to my latest breath. The memory shall survive me, when my existence is no
  more. Do you think you are out of the reach of my power, because a court of
  justice has acquitted you?"
While Mr. Falkland was speaking a sudden distemper came over his
  countenance, his whole frame was shaken by an instantaneous convulsion, and
  he staggered to a chair. In about three minutes he recovered.
"Yes," said he, "I am still alive. I shall live for days, and months, and
  years; the power that made me, of whatever kind it be, can only determine
  how long. I live the guardian of my reputation. That, and to endure a misery
  such as man never endured, are the only ends to which I live. But, when I am
  no more, my fame shall still survive. My character shall be revered as
  spotless and unimpeachable by all posterity, as long as the name of Falkland
  shall be repeated in the most distant regions of the many-peopled
  globe."
Having said this, he returned to the discourse which more immediately
  related to my future condition and happiness.
"There is one condition," said he, "upon which you may obtain some
  mitigation of your future calamity. It is for that purpose that I have sent
  for you. Listen to my proposal with deliberation and sobriety. Remember,
  that the insanity is not less to trifle with the resolved determination of
  my soul, than it would be to pull a mountain upon your head that hung
  trembling upon the edge of the mighty Apennine!
"I insist then upon your signing a paper, declaring, in the most solemn
  manner, that I am innocent of murder, and that the charge you alleged at the
  office in Bow-street is false, malicious, and groundless. Perhaps you may
  scruple out of a regard to truth. Is truth then entitled to adoration for
  its own sake, and not for the sake of the happiness it is calculated to
  produce? Will a reasonable man sacrifice to barren truth, when benevolence,
  humanity, and every consideration that is dear to the human heart, require
  that it should be superseded? It is probable that I may never make use of
  this paper, but I require it, as the only practicable reparation to the
  honour you have assailed. This is what I had to propose. I expect your
  answer."
"Sir," answered I, "I have heard you to an end, and I stand in need of no
  deliberation to enable me to answer you in the negative. You took me up a
  raw and inexperienced boy, capable of being moulded to any form you pleased.
  But you have communicated to me volumes of experience in a very short
  period. I am no longer irresolute and pliable. What is the power you retain
  over my fate I am unable to discover. You may destroy me; but you cannot
  make me tremble. I am not concerned to enquire, whether what I have suffered
  flowed from you by design or otherwise; whether you were the author of my
  miseries, or only connived at them. This I know, that I have suffered too
  exquisitely on your account, for me to feel the least remaining claim on
  your part to my making any voluntary sacrifice.
"You say that benevolence and humanity require this sacrifice of me. No;
  it would only be a sacrifice to your mad and misguided love of
  fame,—to that passion which has been the source of all your miseries,
  of the most tragical calamities to others, and of every misfortune that has
  happened to me. I have no forbearance to exercise towards that passion. If
  you be not yet cured of this tremendous and sanguinary folly, at least I
  will do nothing to cherish it. I know not whether from my youth I was
  destined for a hero; but I may thank you for having taught me a lesson of
  insurmountable fortitude.
"What is it that you require of me? that I should sign away my own
  reputation for the better maintaining of yours. Where is the equality of
  that? What is it that casts me at such an immense distance below you, as to
  make every thing that relates to me wholly unworthy of consideration? You
  have been educated in the prejudice of birth. I abhor that prejudice. You
  have made me desperate, and I utter what that desperation suggests.
"You will tell me perhaps that I have no reputation to lose; that, while
  you are esteemed faultless and unblemished, I am universally reputed a
  thief, a suborner, and a calumniator. Be it so. I will never do any thing to
  countenance those imputations. The more I am destitute of the esteem of
  mankind, the more careful I will be to preserve my own. I will never from
  fear, or any other mistaken motive, do any thing of which I ought to be
  ashamed.
"You are determined to be for ever my enemy. I have in no degree deserved
  this eternal abhorrence. I have always esteemed and pitied you. For a
  considerable time I rather chose to expose myself to every kind of
  misfortune, than disclose the secret that was so dear to you. I was not
  deterred by your menaces—(what could you make me suffer more than I
  actually suffered?)—but by the humanity of my own heart; in which, and
  not in means of violence, you ought to have reposed your confidence. What is
  the mysterious vengeance that you can yet execute against me? You menaced me
  before; you can menace no worse now. You are wearing out the springs of
  terror. Do with me as you please; you teach me to hear you with an
  unshrinking and desperate firmness. Recollect yourself! I did not proceed to
  the step with which you reproach me, till I was apparently urged to the very
  last extremity. I had suffered as much as human nature can suffer; I had
  lived in the midst of eternal alarm and unintermitted watchfulness; I had
  twice been driven to purposes of suicide. I am now sorry however, that the
  step of which you complain was ever adopted. But, urged to exasperation by
  an unintermitted rigour, I had no time to cool or to deliberate. Even at
  present I cherish no vengeance against you. All that is reasonable, all that
  can really contribute to your security, I will readily concede; but I will
  not be driven to an act repugnant to all reason, integrity, and
  justice."
Mr. Falkland listened to me with astonishment and impatience. He had
  entertained no previous conception of the firmness I displayed. Several
  times he was convulsed with the fury that laboured in his breast. Once and
  again he betrayed an intention to interrupt; but he was restrained by the
  collectedness of my manner, and perhaps by a desire to be acquainted with
  the entire state of my mind. Finding that I had concluded, he paused for a
  moment; his passion seemed gradually to enlarge, till it was no longer
  capable of control.
"It is well!" said he, gnashing his teeth, and stamping upon the ground.
  "You refuse the composition I offer! I have no power to persuade you to
  compliance! You defy me! At least I have a power respecting you, and that
  power I will exercise; a power that shall grind you into atoms. I condescend
  to no more expostulation. I know what I am, and what I can be. I know what
  you are, and what fate is reserved for you!"
Saying this he quitted the room.
Such were the particulars of this memorable scene. The impression it has
  left upon my understanding is indelible. The figure and appearance of Mr.
  Falkland, his death-like weakness and decay, his more than mortal energy and
  rage, the words that he spoke, the motives that animated him, produced one
  compounded effect upon my mind that nothing of the same nature could ever
  parallel. The idea of his misery thrilled through my frame. How weak in
  comparison of it is the imaginary hell, which the great enemy of mankind is
  represented as carrying every where about with him!
From this consideration, my mind presently turned to the menaces he had
  vented against myself. They were all mysterious and undefined. He had talked
  of power, but had given no hint from which I could collect in what he
  imagined it to consist. He had talked of misery, but had not dropped a
  syllable respecting the nature of the misery to be inflicted.
I sat still for some time, ruminating on these thoughts. Neither Mr.
  Falkland nor any other person appeared to disturb my meditations. I rose,
  went out of the room, and from the inn into the street. No one offered to
  molest me. It was strange! What was the nature of this power, from which I
  was to apprehend so much, yet which seemed to leave me at perfect liberty? I
  began to imagine that all I had heard from this dreadful adversary was mere
  madness and extravagance, and that he was at length deprived of the use of
  reason, which had long served him only as a medium of torment. Yet was it
  likely in that case that he should be able to employ Gines and his
  associate, who had just been his instruments of violence upon my person?
I proceeded along the streets with considerable caution. I looked before
  me and behind me, as well as the darkness would allow me to do, that I might
  not again be hunted in sight by some men of stratagem and violence without
  my perceiving it. I went not, as before, beyond the limits of the town, but
  considered the streets, the houses, and the inhabitants, as affording some
  degree of security. I was still walking with my mind thus full of suspicion
  and forecast, when I discovered Thomas, that servant of Mr. Falkland whom I
  have already more than once had occasion to mention. He advanced towards me
  with an air so blunt and direct, as instantly to remove from me the idea of
  any thing insidious in his purpose; besides that I had always felt the
  character of Thomas, rustic and uncultivated as it was, to be entitled to a
  more than common portion of esteem.
"Thomas," said I, as he advanced, "I hope you are willing to give me joy,
  that I am at length delivered from the dreadful danger which for many months
  haunted me so unmercifully."
"No," rejoined Thomas, roughly; "I be not at all willing. I do not know
  what to make of myself in this affair. While you were in prison in that
  miserable fashion, I felt all at one almost as if I loved you: and now that
  that is over, and you are turned out loose in the world to do your worst, my
  blood rises at the very sight of you. To look at you, you are almost that
  very lad Williams for whom I could with pleasure, as it were, have laid down
  my life; and yet, behind that smiling face there lie robbery, and lying, and
  every thing that is ungrateful and murderous. Your last action was worse
  than all the rest. How could you find in your heart to revive that cruel
  story about Mr. Tyrrel, which every body had agreed, out of regard to the
  squire, never to mention again, and of which I know, and you know, he is as
  innocent as the child unborn? There are causes and reasons, or else I could
  have wished from the bottom of my soul never to have set eyes on you
  again."
"And you still persist in your hard thoughts of me?"
"Worse! I think worse of you than ever! Before, I thought you as bad as
  man could be. I wonder from my soul what you are to do next. But you make
  good the old saying, 'Needs must go, that the devil drives.'"
"And so there is never to be an end of my misfortunes! What can Mr.
  Falkland contrive for me worse than the ill opinion and enmity of all
  mankind?"
"Mr. Falkland contrive! He is the best friend you have in the world,
  though you are the basest traitor to him. Poor man! it makes one's heart
  ache to look at him; he is the very image of grief. And it is not clear to
  me that it is not all owing to you. At least you have given the finishing
  lift to the misfortune that was already destroying him. There have been the
  devil and all to pay between him and squire Forester. The squire is right
  raving mad with my master, for having outwitted him in the matter of the
  trial, and saved your life. He swears that you shall be taken up and tried
  all over again at the next assizes; but my master is resolute, and I believe
  will carry it his own way. He says indeed that the law will not allow squire
  Forester to have his will in this. To see him ordering every thing for your
  benefit, and taking all your maliciousness as mild and innocent as a lamb,
  and to think of your vile proceedings against him, is a sight one shall not
  see again, go all the world over. For God's sake, repent of your reprobate
  doings, and make what little reparation is in your power! Think of your poor
  soul, before you awake, as to be sure one of these days you will, in fire
  and brimstone everlasting!"
Saying this, he held out his hand and took hold of mine. The action
  seemed strange; but I at first thought it the unpremeditated result of his
  solemn and well-intended adjuration. I felt however that he put something
  into my hand. The next moment he quitted his hold, and hastened from me with
  the swiftness of an arrow. What he had thus given me was a bank-note of
  twenty pounds. I had no doubt that he had been charged to deliver it to me
  from Mr. Falkland.
What was I to infer? what light did it throw upon the intentions of my
  inexorable persecutor? his animosity against me was as great as ever; that I
  had just had confirmed to me from his own mouth. Yet his animosity appeared
  to be still tempered with the remains of humanity. He prescribed to it a
  line, wide enough to embrace the gratification of his views, and within the
  boundaries of that line it stopped. But this discovery carried no
  consolation to my mind. I knew not what portion of calamity I was fated to
  endure, before his jealousy of dishonour, and inordinate thirst of fame
  would deem themselves satisfied.
Another question offered itself. Was I to receive the money which had
  just been put into my hands? the money of a man who had inflicted upon me
  injuries, less than those which he had entailed upon himself, but the
  greatest that one man can inflict upon another? who had blasted my youth,
  who had destroyed my peace, who had held me up to the abhorrence of mankind,
  and rendered me an outcast upon the face of the earth? who had forced the
  basest and most atrocious falsehoods, and urged them with a seriousness and
  perseverance which produced universal belief? who, an hour before, had vowed
  against me inexorable enmity, and sworn to entail upon me misery without
  end? Would not this conduct on my part betray a base and abject spirit, that
  crouched under tyranny, and kissed the hands that were imbrued in my
  blood?
If these reasons appeared strong, neither was the other side without
  reasons in reply. I wanted the money: not for any purpose of vice or
  superfluity, but for those purposes without which life cannot subsist. Man
  ought to be able, wherever placed, to find for himself the means of
  existence; but I was to open a new scene of life, to remove to some distant
  spot, to be prepared against all the ill-will of mankind, and the unexplored
  projects of hostility of a most accomplished foe. The actual means of
  existence are the property of all. What should hinder me from taking that of
  which I was really in want, when, in taking it, I risked no vengeance, and
  perpetrated no violence? The property in question will be beneficial to me,
  and the voluntary surrender of it is accompanied with no injury to its late
  proprietor; what other condition can be necessary to render the use of it on
  my part a duty? He that lately possessed it has injured me; does that alter
  its value as a medium of exchange? He will boast, perhaps of the imaginary
  obligation he has conferred on me: surely to shrink from a thing in itself
  right from any such apprehension, can be the result only of pusillanimity
  and cowardice!

</div></body></text></TEI>