<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="35">CHAPTER VII.
They were no sooner withdrawn than I cast my eye upon the old man, and
  found something extremely venerable and interesting in his appearance. His
  form was above the middle size. It indicated that his strength had been once
  considerable; nor was it at this time by any means annihilated. His hair was
  in considerable quantity, and was as white as the drifted snow. His
  complexion was healthful and ruddy, at the same time that his face was
  furrowed with wrinkles. In his eye there was remarkable vivacity, and his
  whole countenance was strongly expressive of good-nature. The boorishness of
  his rank in society was lost in the cultivation his mind had derived from
  habits of sensibility and benevolence.
The view of his figure immediately introduced a train of ideas into my
  mind, respecting the advantage to be drawn from the presence of such a
  person. The attempt to take any step without his consent was hopeless; for,
  though I should succeed with regard to him, he could easily give the alarm
  to other persons, who would, no doubt, be within call. Add to which, I could
  scarcely have prevailed on myself to offer any offence to a person whose
  first appearance so strongly engaged my affection and esteem. In reality my
  thoughts were turned into a different channel. I was impressed with an
  ardent wish to be able to call this man my benefactor. Pursued by a train of
  ill fortune, I could no longer consider myself as a member of society. I was
  a solitary being, cut off from the expectation of sympathy, kindness, and
  the good-will of mankind. I was strongly impelled, by the situation in which
  the present moment placed me, to indulge in a luxury which my destiny seemed
  to have denied. I could not conceive the smallest comparison between the
  idea of deriving my liberty from the spontaneous kindness of a worthy and
  excellent mind, and that of being indebted for it to the selfishness and
  baseness of the worst members of society. It was thus that I allowed myself
  in the wantonness of refinement, even in the midst of destruction.
Guided by these sentiments, I requested his attention to the
  circumstances by which I had been brought into my present situation. He
  immediately signified his assent, and said he would cheerfully listen to any
  thing I thought proper to communicate. I told him, the persons who had just
  left me in charge with him had come to this town for the purpose of
  apprehending some person who had been guilty of robbing the mail; that they
  had chosen to take me up under this warrant, and had conducted me before a
  justice of the peace; that they had soon detected their mistake, the person
  in question being an Irishman, and differing from me both in country and
  stature; but that, by collusion between them and the justice, they were
  permitted to retain me in custody, and pretended to undertake to conduct me
  to Warwick to confront me with my accomplice; that, in searching me at the
  justice's, they had found a sum of money in my possession which excited
  their cupidity, and that they had just been proposing to me to give me my
  liberty upon condition of my surrendering this sum into their hands. Under
  these circumstances, I requested him to consider, whether he would wish to
  render himself the instrument of their extortion. I put myself into his
  hands, and solemnly averred the truth of the facts I had just stated. If he
  would assist me in my escape, it could have no other effect than to
  disappoint the base passions of my conductors. I would upon no account
  expose him to any real inconvenience; but I was well assured that the same
  generosity that should prompt him to a good deed, would enable him
  effectually to vindicate it when done; and that those who detained me, when
  they had lost sight of their prey, would feel covered with confusion, and
  not dare to take another step in the affair.
The old man listened to what I related with curiosity and interest. He
  said that he had always felt an abhorrence to the sort of people who had me
  in their hands; that he had an aversion to the task they had just imposed
  upon him, but that he could not refuse some little disagreeable offices to
  oblige his daughter and son-in-law. He had no doubt, from my countenance and
  manner, of the truth of what I had asserted to him. It was an extraordinary
  request I had made, and he did not know what had induced me to think him the
  sort of person to whom, with any prospect of success, it might be made. In
  reality however his habits of thinking were uncommon, and he felt more than
  half inclined to act as I desired. One thing at least he would ask of me in
  return, which was to be faithfully informed in some degree respecting the
  person he was desired to oblige. What was my name?
The question came upon me unprepared. But, whatever might be the
  consequence, I could not bear to deceive the person by whom it was put, and
  in the circumstances under which it was put. The practice of perpetual
  falsehood is too painful a task. I replied, that my name was Williams.
He paused. His eye was fixed upon me. I saw his complexion alter at the
  repetition of that word. He proceeded with visible anxiety.
My Christian name?
Caleb.
Good God! it could not be ----? He conjured me by every thing that was
  sacred to answer him faithfully to one question more. I was not—no, it
  was impossible—the person who had formerly lived servant with Mr.
  Falkland, of ----?
I told him that, whatever might be the meaning of his question, I would
  answer him truly. I was the individual he mentioned.
As I uttered these words the old man rose from his seat. He was sorry
  that fortune had been so unpropitious to him, as for him ever to have set
  eyes upon me! I was a monster with whom the very earth groaned!
I entreated that he would suffer me to explain this new misapprehension,
  as he had done in the former instance. I had no doubt that I should do it
  equally to his satisfaction.
No! no! no! he would upon no consideration admit, that his ears should
  suffer such contamination. This case and the other were very different.
  There was no criminal upon the face of the earth, no murderer, half so
  detestable as the person who could prevail upon himself to utter the charges
  I had done, by way of recrimination, against so generous a master.—The
  old man was in a perfect agony with the recollection.
At length he calmed himself enough to say, he should never cease to
  grieve that he had held a moment's parley with me. He did not know what was
  the conduct severe justice required of him; but, since he had come into the
  knowledge of who I was only by my own confession, it was irreconcilably
  repugnant to his feelings to make use of that knowledge to my injury. Here
  therefore all relation between us ceased; as indeed it would be an abuse of
  words to consider me in the light of a human creature. He would do me no
  mischief; but, on the other hand, he would not, for the world, be in any way
  assisting and abetting me.
I was inexpressibly affected at the abhorrence this good and benevolent
  creature expressed against me. I could not be silent; I endeavoured once and
  again to prevail upon him to hear me. But his determination was unalterable.
  Our contest lasted for some time, and he at length terminated it by ringing
  the bell, and calling up the waiter. A very little while after, my
  conductors entered, and the other persons withdrew.
It was a part of the singularity of my fate that it hurried me from one
  species of anxiety and distress to another, too rapidly to suffer any one of
  them to sink deeply into my mind. I am apt to believe, in the retrospect,
  that half the calamities I was destined to endure would infallibly have
  overwhelmed and destroyed me. But, as it was, I had no leisure to chew the
  cud upon misfortunes as they befel me, but was under the necessity of
  forgetting them, to guard against peril that the next moment seemed ready to
  crush me.
The behaviour of this incomparable and amiable old man cut me to the
  heart. It was a dreadful prognostic for all my future life. But, as I have
  just observed, my conductors entered, and another subject called imperiously
  upon my attention. I could have been content, mortified as I was at this
  instant, to have been shut up in some impenetrable solitude, and to have
  wrapped myself in inconsolable misery. But the grief I endured had not such
  power over me as that I could be content to risk the being led to the
  gallows. The love of life, and still more a hatred against oppression,
  steeled my heart against that species of inertness. In the scene that had
  just passed I had indulged, as I have said, in a wantonness and luxury of
  refinement. It was time that indulgence should be brought to a period. It
  was dangerous to trifle any more upon the brink of fate; and, penetrated as
  I was with sadness by the result of my last attempt, I was little disposed
  to unnecessary circumambulation.
I was exactly in the temper in which the gentlemen who had me in their
  power would have desired to find me. Accordingly we entered immediately upon
  business; and, after some chaffering, they agreed to accept eleven guineas
  as the price of my freedom. To preserve however the chariness of their
  reputation, they insisted upon conducting me with them for a few miles on
  the outside of a stage-coach. They then pretended that the road they had to
  travel lay in a cross country direction; and, having quitted the vehicle,
  they suffered me, almost as soon as it was out of sight, to shake off this
  troublesome association, and follow my own inclinations. It may be worth
  remarking by the way, that these fellows outwitted themselves at their own
  trade. They had laid hold of me at first under the idea of a prize of a
  hundred guineas; they had since been glad to accept a composition of eleven:
  but if they had retained me a little longer in their possession, they would
  have found the possibility of acquiring the sum that had originally excited
  their pursuit, upon a different score.
The mischances that had befallen me, in my late attempt to escape from my
  pursuers by sea, deterred me from the thought of repeating that experiment.
  I therefore once more returned to the suggestion of hiding myself, at least
  for the present, amongst the crowds of the metropolis. Meanwhile, I by no
  means thought proper to venture by the direct route, and the less so, as
  that was the course which would be steered by my late conductors; but took
  my road along the borders of Wales. The only incident worth relating in this
  place occurred in an attempt to cross the Severn in a particular point. The
  mode was by a ferry; but, by some strange inadvertence, I lost my way so
  completely as to be wholly unable that night to reach the ferry, and arrive
  at the town which I had destined for my repose.
This may seem a petty disappointment, in the midst of the overwhelming
  considerations that might have been expected to engross every thought of my
  mind. Yet it was borne by me with singular impatience. I was that day
  uncommonly fatigued. Previously to the time that I mistook, or at least was
  aware of the mistake of the road, the sky had become black and lowring, and
  soon after the clouds burst down in sheets of rain. I was in the midst of a
  heath, without a tree or covering of any sort to shelter me. I was
  thoroughly drenched in a moment. I pushed on with a sort of sullen
  determination. By and by the rain gave place to a storm of hail. The
  hail-stones were large and frequent. I was ill defended by the miserable
  covering I wore, and they seemed to cut me in a thousand directions. The
  hail-storm subsided, and was again succeeded by a heavy rain. By this time
  it was that I had perceived I was wholly out of my road. I could discover
  neither man nor beast, nor habitation of any kind. I walked on, measuring at
  every turn the path it would be proper to pursue, but in no instance finding
  a sufficient reason to reject one or prefer another. My mind was bursting
  with depression and anguish. I muttered imprecations and murmuring as I
  passed along. I was full of loathing and abhorrence of life, and all that
  life carries in its train. After wandering without any certain direction for
  two hours, I was overtaken by the night. The scene was nearly pathless, and
  it was vain to think of proceeding any farther.
Here I was, without comfort, without shelter, and without food. There was
  not a particle of my covering that was not as wet as if it had been fished
  from the bottom of the ocean. My teeth chattered. I trembled in every limb.
  My heart burned with universal fury. At one moment I stumbled and fell over
  some unseen obstacle; at another I was turned back by an impediment I could
  not overcome.
There was no strict connection between these casual inconveniences and
  the persecution under which I laboured. But my distempered thoughts
  confounded them together. I cursed the whole system of human existence. I
  said, "Here I am, an outcast, destined to perish with hunger and cold. All
  men desert me. All men hate me. I am driven with mortal threats from the
  sources of comfort and existence. Accursed world! that hates without a
  cause, that overwhelms innocence with calamities which ought to be spared
  even to guilt! Accursed world! dead to every manly sympathy; with eyes of
  horn, and hearts of steel! Why do I consent to live any longer? Why do I
  seek to drag on an existence, which, if protracted, must be protracted
  amidst the lairs of these human tigers?"
This paroxysm at length exhausted itself. Presently after, I discovered a
  solitary shed, which I was contented to resort to for shelter. In a corner
  of the shed I found some clean straw. I threw off my rags, placed them in a
  situation where they would best be dried, and buried myself amidst this
  friendly warmth. Here I forgot by degrees the anguish that had racked me. A
  wholesome shed and fresh straw may seem but scanty benefits; but they
  offered themselves when least expected, and my whole heart was lightened by
  the encounter. Through fatigue of mind and body, it happened in this
  instance, though in general my repose was remarkably short, that I slept
  till almost noon of the next day. When I rose, I found that I was at no
  great distance from the ferry, which I crossed, and entered the town where I
  intended to have rested the preceding night.
It was market-day. As I passed near the cross, I observed two people look
  at me with great earnestness: after which one of them exclaimed, "I will be
  damned if I do not think that this is the very fellow those men were
  enquiring for who set off an hour ago by the coach for ----." I was
  extremely alarmed at this information; and, quickening my pace, turned sharp
  down a narrow lane. The moment I was out of sight I ran with all the speed I
  could exert, and did not think myself safe till I was several miles distant
  from the place where this information had reached my ears. I have always
  believed that the men to whom it related were the very persons who had
  apprehended me on board the ship in which I had embarked for Ireland; that,
  by some accident, they had met with the description of my person as
  published on the part of Mr. Falkland; and that, from putting together the
  circumstances, they had been led to believe that this was the very
  individual who had lately been in their custody. Indeed it was a piece of
  infatuation in me, for which I am now unable to account, that, after the
  various indications which had occurred in that affair, proving to them that
  I was a man in critical and peculiar circumstances, I should have persisted
  in wearing the same disguise without the smallest alteration. My escape in
  the present case was eminently fortunate. If I had not lost my way in
  consequence of the hail-storm on the preceding night, or if I had not so
  greatly overslept myself this very morning, I must almost infallibly have
  fallen into the hands of these infernal blood-hunters.
The town they had chosen for their next stage, the name of which I had
  thus caught in the market-place, was the town to which, but for this
  intimation, I should have immediately proceeded. As it was, I determined to
  take a road as wide of it as possible. In the first place to which I came,
  in which it was practicable to do so, I bought a great coat, which I drew
  over my beggar's weeds, and a better hat. The hat I slouched over my face,
  and covered one of my eyes with a green-silk shade. The handkerchief, which
  I had hitherto worn about my head, I now tied about the lower part of my
  visage, so as to cover my mouth. By degrees I discarded every part of my
  former dress, and wore for my upper garment a kind of carman's frock, which,
  being of the better sort, made me look like the son of a reputable farmer of
  the lower class. Thus equipped, I proceeded on my journey, and, after a
  thousand alarms, precautions, and circuitous deviations from the direct
  path, arrived safely in London.

</div></body></text></TEI>