<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="21">CHAPTER VIII.
Mr. Forester had left us about three weeks, when Mr. Falkland sent me
  upon some business to an estate he possessed in a neighbouring county, about
  fifty miles from his principal residence. The road led in a direction wholly
  wide of the habitation of our late visitor. I was upon my return from the
  place to which I had been sent, when I began in fancy to take a survey of
  the various circumstances of my condition, and by degrees lost, in the
  profoundness of my contemplation, all attention to the surrounding objects.
  The first determination of my mind was to escape from the lynx-eyed jealousy
  and despotism of Mr. Falkland; the second to provide, by every effort of
  prudence and deliberation I could devise, against the danger with which I
  well knew my attempt must be accompanied.
Occupied with these meditations, I rode many miles before I perceived
  that I had totally deviated from the right path. At length I roused myself,
  and surveyed the horizon round me; but I could observe nothing with which my
  organ was previously acquainted. On three sides, the heath stretched as far
  as the eye could reach; on the fourth, I discovered at some distance a wood
  of no ordinary dimensions. Before me, scarcely a single track could be
  found, to mark that any human being had ever visited the spot. As the best
  expedient I could devise, I bent my course towards the wood I have
  mentioned, and then pursued, as well as I was able, the windings of the
  inclosure. This led me, after some time, to the end of the heath; but I was
  still as much at a loss as ever respecting the road I should pursue. The sun
  was hid from me by a grey and cloudy atmosphere; I was induced to continue
  along the skirts of the wood, and surmounted with some difficulty the hedges
  and other obstacles that from time to time presented themselves. My thoughts
  were gloomy and disconsolate; the dreariness of the day, and the solitude
  which surrounded me, seemed to communicate a sadness to my soul. I had
  proceeded a considerable way, and was overcome with hunger and fatigue, when
  I discovered a road and a little inn at no great distance. I made up to
  them, and upon enquiry found that, instead of pursuing the proper direction,
  I had taken one that led to Mr. Forester's rather than to my own habitation.
  I alighted, and was entering the house, when the appearance of that
  gentleman struck my eyes.
Mr. Forester accosted me with kindness, invited me into the room where he
  had been sitting, and enquired what accident had brought me to that
  place.
While he was speaking, I could not help recollecting the extraordinary
  manner in which we were thus once more brought together, and a train of
  ideas was by this means suggested to my mind. Some refreshment was, by Mr.
  Forester's order, prepared for me; I sat down, and partook of it. Still this
  thought dwelt upon my recollection:—"Mr. Falkland will never be made
  acquainted with our meeting; I have an opportunity thrown in my way, which
  if I do not improve, I shall deserve all the consequences that may result. I
  can now converse with a friend, and a powerful friend, without fear of being
  watched and overlooked." What wonder that I was tempted to disclose, not Mr.
  Falkland's secret, but my own situation, and receive the advice of a man of
  worth and experience, which might perhaps be adequately done without
  entering into any detail injurious to my patron?
Mr. Forester, on his part, expressed a desire to learn why it was I
  thought myself unhappy, and why I had avoided him during the latter part of
  his residence under the same roof, as evidently as I had before taken
  pleasure in his communications. I replied, that I could give him but an
  imperfect satisfaction upon these points; but what I could, I would
  willingly explain. The fact, I proceeded, was, that there were reasons which
  rendered it impossible for me to have a tranquil moment under the roof of
  Mr. Falkland. I had revolved the matter again and again in my mind, and was
  finally convinced that I owed it to myself to withdraw from his service. I
  added, that I was sensible, by this half-confidence, I might rather seem to
  merit the disapprobation of Mr. Forester than his countenance; but I
  declared my persuasion that, if he could be acquainted with the whole
  affair, however strange my behaviour might at present appear, he would
  applaud my reserve.
He appeared to muse for a moment upon what I had said, and then asked
  what reason I could have to complain of Mr. Falkland? I replied, that I
  entertained the deepest reverence for my patron; I admired his abilities,
  and considered him as formed for the benefit of his species. I should in my
  own opinion be the vilest of miscreants, if I uttered a whisper to his
  disadvantage. But this did not avail: I was not fit for him; perhaps I was
  not good enough for him; at all events, I must be perpetually miserable so
  long as I continued to live with him.
I observed Mr. Forester gaze upon me eagerly with curiosity and surprise;
  but this circumstance I did not think proper to notice. Having recovered
  himself, he enquired, why then, that being the case, I did not quit his
  service? I answered, what he now touched upon was that which most of all
  contributed to my misfortune. Mr. Falkland was not ignorant of my dislike to
  my present situation; perhaps he thought it unreasonable, unjust; but I knew
  that he would never be brought to consent to my giving way to it.
Here Mr. Forester interrupted me, and, smiling, said, I magnified
  obstacles, and over-rated my own importance; adding, that he would undertake
  to remove that difficulty, as well as to provide me with a more agreeable
  appointment. This suggestion produced in me a serious alarm. I replied, that
  I must entreat him upon no account to think of applying to Mr. Falkland upon
  the subject. I added, that perhaps I was only betraying my imbecility; but
  in reality, unacquainted as I was with experience and the world, I was
  afraid, though disgusted with my present residence, to expose myself upon a
  mere project of my own, to the resentment of so considerable a man as Mr.
  Falkland. If he would favour me with his advice upon the subject, or if he
  would only give me leave to hope for his protection in case of any
  unforeseen accident, this was all I presumed to request; and, thus
  encouraged. I would venture to obey the dictates of my inclination, and fly
  in pursuit of my lost tranquillity.
Having thus opened myself to this generous friend, as far as I could do
  it with propriety and safety, he sat for some time silent, with an air of
  deep reflection. At length, with a countenance of unusual severity, and a
  characteristic fierceness of manner and voice, he thus addressed me: "Young
  man, perhaps you are ignorant of the nature of the conduct you at present
  hold. May be, you do not know that where there is mystery, there is always
  something at bottom that will not bear the telling. Is this the way to
  obtain the favour of a man of consequence and respectability? To pretend to
  make a confidence, and then tell him a disjointed story that has not common
  sense in it!"
I answered, that, whatever were the amount of that prejudice, I must
  submit. I placed my hope of a candid construction, in the present instance,
  in the rectitude of his nature.
He went on: "You do so; do you? I tell you, sir, the rectitude of my
  nature is an enemy to disguise. Come, boy, you must know that I understand
  these things better than you. Tell all, or expect nothing from me but
  censure and contempt."
"Sir," replied I, "I have spoken from deliberation; I have told you my
  choice, and, whatever be the result, I must abide by it. If in this
  misfortune you refuse me your assistance, here I must end, having gained by
  the communication only your ill opinion and displeasure."
He looked hard at me, as if he would see me through. At length he relaxed
  his features, and softened his manner. "You are a foolish, headstrong boy,"
  said he, "and I shall have an eye upon you. I shall never place in you the
  confidence I have done. But—I will not desert you. At present, the
  balance between approbation and dislike is in your favour. How long it will
  last, I cannot tell; I engage for nothing. But it is my rule to act as I
  feel. I will for this time do as you require;—and, pray God, it may
  answer. I will receive you, either now or hereafter, under my roof, trusting
  that I shall have no reason to repent, and that appearances will terminate
  as favourably as I wish, though I scarcely know how to hope it."
We were engaged in the earnest discussion of subjects thus interesting to
  my peace, when we were interrupted by an event the most earnestly to have
  been deprecated. Without the smallest notice, and as if he had dropped upon
  us from the clouds, Mr. Falkland burst into the room. I found afterwards
  that Mr. Forester had come thus far upon an appointment to meet Mr.
  Falkland, and that the place of their intended rendezvous was at the next
  stage. Mr. Forester was detained at the inn where we now were by our
  accidental rencounter, and in reality had for the moment forgotten his
  appointment; while Mr. Falkland, not finding him where he expected,
  proceeded thus far towards the house of his kinsman. To me the meeting was
  most unaccountable in the world.
I instantly foresaw the dreadful complication of misfortune that was
  included in this event. To Mr. Falkland, the meeting between me and his
  relation must appear not accidental, but, on my part at least, the result of
  design. I was totally out of the road I had been travelling by his
  direction; I was in a road that led directly to the house of Mr. Forester.
  What must he think of this? How must he suppose I came to that place? The
  truth, if told, that I came there without design, and purely in consequence
  of having lost my way, must appear to be the most palpable lie that ever was
  devised.
Here then I stood detected in the fact of that intercourse which had been
  so severely forbidden. But in this instance it was infinitely worse than in
  those which had already given so much disturbance to Mr. Falkland. It was
  then frank and unconcealed; and therefore the presumption was, that it was
  for purposes that required no concealment. But the present interview, if
  concerted, was in the most emphatical degree clandestine. Nor was it less
  perilous than it was clandestine: it had been forbidden with the most
  dreadful menaces; and Mr. Falkland was not ignorant how deep an impression
  those menaces had made upon my imagination. Such a meeting therefore could
  not have been concerted under such circumstances, for a trivial purpose, or
  for any purpose that his heart did not ache to think of. Such was the amount
  of my crime, such was the agony my appearance was calculated to inspire; and
  it was reasonable to suppose that the penalty I had to expect would be
  proportionable. The threats of Mr. Falkland still sounded in my ears, and I
  was in a transport of terror.
The conduct of the same man in different circumstances, is often so
  various as to render it very difficult to be accounted for. Mr. Falkland, in
  this to him, terrible crisis, did not seem to be in any degree hurried away
  by passion. For a moment he was dumb; his eyes glared with astonishment; and
  the next moment, as it were, he had the most perfect calmness and
  self-command. Had it been otherwise, I have no doubt that I should instantly
  have entered into an explanation of the manner in which I came there, the
  ingenuousness and consistency of which could not but have been in some
  degree attended with a favourable event. But, as it was, I suffered myself
  to be overcome; I yielded, as in a former instance, to the discomfiting
  influence of surprise. I dared scarcely breathe; I observed the appearances
  with equal anxiety and surprise. Mr. Falkland quietly ordered me to return
  home, and take along with me the groom he had brought with him. I obeyed in
  silence.
I afterwards understood, that he enquired minutely of Mr. Forester the
  circumstances of our meeting; and that that gentleman, perceiving that the
  meeting itself was discovered, and guided by habits of frankness, which,
  when once rooted in a character, it is difficult to counteract, told Mr.
  Falkland every thing that had passed, together with the remarks it had
  suggested to his own mind. Mr. Falkland received the communication with an
  ambiguous and studied silence, which by no means operated to my advantage in
  the already poisoned mind of Mr. Forester. His silence was partly the direct
  consequence of a mind watchful, inquisitive, and doubting; and partly
  perhaps was adopted for the sake of the effect it was calculated to produce,
  Mr. Falkland not being unwilling to encourage prejudices against a character
  which might one day come in competition with his own.
As to me, I went home indeed, for this was not a moment to resist. Mr.
  Falkland, with a premeditation to which he had given the appearance of
  accident, had taken care to send with me a guard to attend upon his
  prisoner. I seemed as if conducting to one of those fortresses, famed in the
  history of despotism, from which the wretched victim is never known to come
  forth alive; and when I entered my chamber, I felt as if I were entering a
  dungeon. I reflected that I was at the mercy of a man, exasperated at my
  disobedience, and who was already formed to cruelty by successive murders.
  My prospects were now closed; I was cut off for ever from pursuits that I
  had meditated with ineffable delight; my death might be the event of a few
  hours. I was a victim at the shrine of conscious guilt, that knew neither
  rest nor satiety; I should be blotted from the catalogue of the living, and
  my fate remain eternally a secret; the man who added my murder to his former
  crimes, would show himself the next morning, and be hailed with the
  admiration and applause of his species.
In the midst of these terrible imaginations, one idea presented itself
  that alleviated my feelings. This was the recollection of the strange and
  unaccountable tranquillity which Mr. Falkland had manifested, when he
  discovered me in company with Mr. Forester. I was not deceived by this. I
  knew that the calm was temporary, and would be succeeded by a tumult and
  whirlwind of the most dreadful sort. But a man under the power of such
  terrors as now occupied me catches at every reed. I said to myself, "This
  tranquillity is a period it is incumbent upon me to improve; the shorter its
  duration may be found, the more speedy am I obliged to be in the use of it."
  In a word, I took the resolution, because I already stood in fear of the
  vengeance of Mr. Falkland, to risk the possibility of provoking it in a
  degree still more inexpiable, and terminate at once my present state of
  uncertainty. I had now opened my case to Mr. Forester, and he had given me
  positive assurances of his protection. I determined immediately to address
  the following letter to Mr. Falkland. The consideration that, if he
  meditated any thing tragical, such a letter would only tend to confirm him,
  did not enter into the present feelings of my mind.
"Sir,
"I have conceived the intention of quitting your service. This is a
  measure we ought both of us to desire. I shall then be, what it is my duty
  to be, master of my own actions. You will be delivered from the presence of
  a person, whom you cannot prevail upon yourself to behold without unpleasing
  emotions.
"Why should you subject me to an eternal penance? Why should you consign
  my youthful hopes to suffering and despair? Consult the principles of
  humanity that have marked the general course of your proceedings, and do not
  let me, I entreat you, be made the subject of a useless severity. My heart
  is impressed with gratitude for your favours. I sincerely ask your
  forgiveness for the many errors of my conduct. I consider the treatment I
  have received under your roof, as one almost uninterrupted scene of kindness
  and generosity. I shall never forget my obligations to you, and will never
  betray them.
"I remain, Sir,
"Your most grateful, respectful,
"and dutiful servant,
"CALEB WILLIAMS."
Such was my employment of the evening of a day which will be ever
  memorable in the history of my life. Mr. Falkland not being yet returned,
  though expected every hour, I was induced to make use of the pretence of
  fatigue to avoid an interview. I went to bed. It may be imagined that my
  slumbers were neither deep nor refreshing.
The next morning I was informed that my patron did not come home till
  late; that he had enquired for me, and, being told that I was in bed, had
  said nothing further upon the subject. Satisfied in this respect, I went to
  the breakfasting parlour, and, though full of anxiety and trepidation,
  endeavoured to busy myself in arranging the books, and a few other little
  occupations, till Mr. Falkland should come down. After a short time I heard
  his step, which I perfectly well knew how to distinguish, in the passage.
  Presently he stopped, and, speaking to some one in a sort of deliberate, but
  smothered voice, I overheard him repeat my name as enquiring for me. In
  conformity to the plan I had persuaded myself to adopt, I now laid the
  letter I had written upon the table at which he usually sat, and made my
  exit at one door as Mr. Falkland entered at the other. This done, I
  withdrew, with flutterings and palpitation, to a private apartment, a sort
  of light closet at the end of the library, where I was accustomed not
  unfrequently to sit.
I had not been here three minutes, when I heard the voice of Mr. Falkland
  calling me. I went to him in the library. His manner was that of a man
  labouring with some dreadful thought, and endeavouring to give an air of
  carelessness and insensibility to his behaviour. Perhaps no carriage of any
  other sort could have produced a sensation of such inexplicable horror, or
  have excited, in the person who was its object, such anxious uncertainty
  about the event.—"That is your letter," said he, throwing it.
"My lad," continued he, "I believe now you have played all your tricks,
  and the farce is nearly at an end! With your apishness and absurdity however
  you have taught me one thing; and, whereas before I have winced at them with
  torture, I am now as tough as an elephant. I shall crush you in the end with
  the same indifference, that I would any other little insect that disturbed
  my serenity.
"I am unable to tell what brought about your meeting with Mr. Forester
  yesterday. It might be design; it might be accident. But, I shall not forget
  it. You write me here, that you are desirous to quit my service. To that I
  have a short answer: You never shall quit it with life. If you attempt it,
  you shall never cease to rue your folly as long as you exist. That is my
  will; and I will not have it resisted. The very next time you disobey me in
  that or any other article, there is an end of your vagaries for ever.
  Perhaps your situation may be a pitiable one; it is for you to look to that.
  I only know that it is in your power to prevent its growing worse; no time
  nor chance shall ever make it better.
"Do not imagine I am afraid of you! I wear an armour, against which all
  your weapons are impotent. I have dug a pit for you; and, whichever way you
  move, backward or forward, to the right or the left, it is ready to swallow
  you. Be still! If once you fall, call as loud as you will, no man on earth
  shall hear your cries; prepare a tale however plausible, or however true,
  the whole world shall execrate you for an impostor. Your innocence shall be
  of no service to you; I laugh at so feeble a defence. It is I that say it;
  you may believe what I tell you—Do you not know, miserable wretch!"
  added he, suddenly altering his tone, and stamping upon the ground with
  fury, "that I have sworn to preserve my reputation, whatever be the expense;
  that I love it more than the whole world and its inhabitants taken together?
  And do you think that you shall wound it? Begone, miscreant! reptile! and
  cease to contend with insurmountable power!"
The part of my history which I am now relating is that which I reflect
  upon with the least complacency. Why was it, that I was once more totally
  overcome by the imperious carriage of Mr. Falkland, and unable to utter a
  word? The reader will be presented with many occasions in the sequel, in
  which I wanted neither facility in the invention of expedients, nor
  fortitude in entering upon my justification. Persecution at length gave
  firmness to my character, and taught me the better part of manhood. But in
  the present instance I was irresolute, overawed, and abashed.
The speech I had heard was the dictate of frenzy, and it created in me a
  similar frenzy. It determined me to do the very thing against which I was
  thus solemnly warned, and fly from my patron's house. I could not enter into
  parley with him; I could no longer endure the vile subjugation he imposed on
  me. It was in vain that my reason warned me of the rashness of a measure, to
  be taken without concert or preparation. I seemed to be in a state in which
  reason had no power. I felt as if I could coolly survey the several
  arguments of the case, perceive that they had prudence, truth, and common
  sense on their side; and then answer, I am under the guidance of a director
  more energetic than you.
I was not long in executing what I had thus rapidly determined. I fixed
  on the evening of that very day as the period of my evasion. Even in this
  short interval I had perhaps sufficient time for deliberation. But all
  opportunity was useless to me; my mind was fixed, and each succeeding moment
  only increased the unspeakable eagerness with which I meditated my escape.
  The hours usually observed by our family in this country residence were
  regular; and one in the morning was the time I selected for my
  undertaking.
In searching the apartment where I slept, I had formerly discovered a
  concealed door, which led to a small apartment of the most secret nature,
  not uncommon in houses so old as that of Mr. Falkland, and which had perhaps
  served as a refuge from persecution, or a security from the inveterate
  hostilities of a barbarous age. I believed no person was acquainted with
  this hiding-place but myself. I felt unaccountably impelled to remove into
  it the different articles of my personal property. I could not at present
  take them away with me. If I were never to recover them, I felt that it
  would be a gratification to my sentiment, that no trace of my existence
  should be found after my departure. Having completed their removal, and
  waited till the hour I had previously chosen, I stole down quietly from my
  chamber with a lamp in my hand. I went along a passage that led to a small
  door opening into the garden, and then crossed the garden, to a gate that
  intersected an elm-walk and a private horse-path on the outside.
I could scarcely believe my good fortune in having thus far executed my
  design without interruption. The terrible images Mr. Falkland's menaces had
  suggested to my mind, made me expect impediment and detection at every step;
  though the impassioned state of my mind impelled me to advance with
  desperate resolution. He probably however counted too securely upon the
  ascendancy of his sentiments, when imperiously pronounced, to think it
  necessary to take precautions against a sinister event. For myself, I drew a
  favourable omen as to the final result of my project, from the smoothness of
  success that attended it in the outset.

</div></body></text></TEI>