<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="36">CHAPTER VIII.
Here then was the termination of an immense series of labours, upon which
  no man could have looked back without astonishment, or forward without a
  sentiment bordering on despair. It was at a price which defies estimation
  that I had purchased this resting-place; whether we consider the efforts it
  had cost me to escape from the walls of my prison, or the dangers and
  anxieties to which I had been a prey, from that hour to the present.
But why do I call the point at which I was now arrived at a
  resting-place? Alas, it was diametrically the reverse! It was my first and
  immediate business to review all the projects of disguise I had hitherto
  conceived, to derive every improvement I could invent from the practice to
  which I had been subjected, and to manufacture a veil of concealment more
  impenetrable than ever. This was an effort to which I could see no end. In
  ordinary cases the hue and cry after a supposed offender is a matter of
  temporary operation; but ordinary cases formed no standard for the colossal
  intelligence of Mr. Falkland. For the same reason, London, which appears an
  inexhaustible reservoir of concealment to the majority of mankind, brought
  no such consolatory sentiment to my mind. Whether life were worth accepting
  on such terms I cannot pronounce. I only know that I persisted in this
  exertion of my faculties, through a sort of parental love that men are
  accustomed to entertain for their intellectual offspring; the more thought I
  had expended in rearing it to its present perfection, the less did I find
  myself disposed to abandon it. Another motive, not less strenuously exciting
  me to perseverance, was the ever-growing repugnance I felt to injustice and
  arbitrary power.
The first evening of my arrival in town I slept at an obscure inn in the
  borough of Southwark, choosing that side of the metropolis, on account of
  its lying entirely wide of the part of England from which I came. I entered
  the inn in the evening in my countryman's frock; and, having paid for my
  lodging before I went to bed, equipped myself next morning as differently as
  my wardrobe would allow, and left the house before day. The frock I made up
  into a small packet, and, having carried it to a distance as great as I
  thought necessary, I dropped it in the corner of an alley through which I
  passed. My next care was to furnish myself with another suit of apparel,
  totally different from any to which I had hitherto had recourse. The
  exterior which I was now induced to assume was that of a Jew. One of the
  gang of thieves upon ---- forest, had been of that race; and by the talent
  of mimicry, which I have already stated myself to possess, I could copy
  their pronunciation of the English language, sufficiently to answer such
  occasions as were likely to present themselves. One of the preliminaries I
  adopted, was to repair to a quarter of the town in which great numbers of
  this people reside, and study their complexion and countenance. Having made
  such provision as my prudence suggested to me, I retired for that night to
  an inn in the midway between Mile-end and Wapping. Here I accoutred myself
  in my new habiliments; and, having employed the same precautions as before,
  retired from my lodging at a time least exposed to observation. It is
  unnecessary to describe the particulars of my new equipage; suffice it to
  say, that one of my cares was to discolour my complexion, and give it the
  dun and sallow hue which is in most instances characteristic of the tribe to
  which I assumed to belong; and that when my metamorphosis was finished, I
  could not, upon the strictest examination, conceive that any one could have
  traced out the person of Caleb Williams in this new disguise.
Thus far advanced in the execution of my project. I deemed it advisable
  to procure a lodging, and change my late wandering life for a stationary
  one. In this lodging I constantly secluded myself from the rising to the
  setting of the sun; the periods I allowed for exercise and air were few, and
  those few by night. I was even cautious of so much as approaching the window
  of my apartment, though upon the attic story; a principle I laid down to
  myself was, not wantonly and unnecessarily to expose myself to risk, however
  slight that risk might appear.
Here let me pause for a moment, to bring before the reader, in the way in
  which it was impressed upon my mind, the nature of my situation. I was born
  free: I was born healthy, vigorous, and active, complete in all the
  lineaments and members of a human body. I was not born indeed to the
  possession of hereditary wealth; but I had a better inheritance, an
  enterprising mind, an inquisitive spirit, a liberal ambition. In a word, I
  accepted my lot with willingness and content; I did not fear but I should
  make my cause good in the lists of existence. I was satisfied to aim at
  small things; I was pleased to play at first for a slender stake; I was more
  willing to grow than to descend in my individual significance.
The free spirit and the firm heart with which I commenced, one
  circumstance was sufficient to blast. I was ignorant of the power which the
  institutions of society give to one man over others; I had fallen unwarily
  into the hands of a person who held it as his fondest wish to oppress and
  destroy me.
I found myself subjected, undeservedly on my part, to all the
  disadvantages which mankind, if they reflected upon them, would hesitate to
  impose on acknowledged guilt. In every human countenance I feared to find
  the countenance of an enemy. I shrunk from the vigilance of every human eye.
  I dared not open my heart to the best affections of our nature. I was shut
  up, a deserted, solitary wretch, in the midst of my species. I dared not
  look for the consolations of friendship; but, instead of seeking to identify
  myself with the joys and sorrows of others, and exchanging the delicious
  gifts of confidence and sympathy, was compelled to centre my thoughts and my
  vigilance in myself. My life was all a lie. I had a counterfeit character to
  support. I had counterfeit manners to assume. My gait, my gestures, my
  accents, were all of them to be studied. I was not free to indulge, no not
  one, honest sally of the soul. Attended with these disadvantages, I was to
  procure myself a subsistence, a subsistence to be acquired with infinite
  precautions, and to be consumed without the hope of enjoyment.
This, even this, I was determined to endure; to put my shoulder to the
  burthen, and support it with unshrinking firmness. Let it not however be
  supposed that I endured it without repining and abhorrence. My time was
  divided between the terrors of an animal that skulks from its pursuers, the
  obstinacy of unshrinking firmness, and that elastic revulsion that from time
  to time seems to shrivel the very hearts of the miserable. If at some
  moments I fiercely defied all the rigours of my fate, at others, and those
  of frequent recurrence, I sunk into helpless despondence. I looked forward
  without hope through the series of my existence, tears of anguish rushed
  from my eyes, my courage became extinct, and I cursed the conscious life
  that was reproduced with every returning day.
"Why," upon such occasions I was accustomed to exclaim, "why am I
  overwhelmed with the load of existence? Why are all these engines at work to
  torment me? I am no murderer; yet, if I were, what worse could I be fated to
  suffer? How vile, squalid, and disgraceful is the state to which I am
  condemned! This is not my place in the roll of existence, the place for
  which either my temper or my understanding has prepared me! To what purpose
  serve the restless aspirations of my soul, but to make me, like a frighted
  bird, beat myself in vain against the enclosure of my cage? Nature,
  barbarous nature! to me thou hast proved indeed the worst of step-mothers;
  endowed me with wishes insatiate, and sunk me in never-ending
  degradation!"
I might have thought myself more secure if I had been in possession of
  money upon which to subsist. The necessity of earning for myself the means
  of existence, evidently tended to thwart the plan of secrecy to which I was
  condemned. Whatever labour I adopted, or deemed myself qualified to
  discharge, it was first to be considered how I was to be provided with
  employment, and where I was to find an employer or purchaser for my
  commodities. In the mean time I had no alternative. The little money with
  which I had escaped from the blood-hunters was almost expended.
After the minutest consideration I was able to bestow upon this question.
  I determined that literature should be the field of my first experiment. I
  had read of money being acquired in this way, and of prices given by the
  speculators in this sort of ware to its proper manufacturers. My
  qualifications I esteemed at a slender valuation. I was not without a
  conviction that experience and practice must pave the way to excellent
  production. But, though of these I was utterly destitute, my propensities
  had always led me in this direction; and my early thirst of knowledge had
  conducted me to a more intimate acquaintance with books, than could perhaps
  have been expected under my circumstances. If my literary pretensions were
  slight, the demand I intended to make upon them was not great. All I asked
  was a subsistence; and I was persuaded few persons could subsist upon
  slenderer means than myself. I also considered this as a temporary
  expedient, and hoped that accident or time might hereafter place me in a
  less precarious situation. The reasons that principally determined my choice
  were, that this employment called upon me for the least preparation, and
  could, as I thought, be exercised with least observation.
There was a solitary woman, of middle age, who tenanted a chamber in this
  house, upon the same floor with my own. I had no sooner determined upon the
  destination of my industry than I cast my eye upon her as the possible
  instrument for disposing of my productions. Excluded as I was from all
  intercourse with my species in general, I found pleasure in the occasional
  exchange of a few words with this inoffensive and good-humoured creature,
  who was already of an age to preclude scandal. She lived upon a very small
  annuity, allowed her by a distant relation, a woman of quality, who,
  possessed of thousands herself, had no other anxiety with respect to this
  person than that she should not contaminate her alliance by the exertion of
  honest industry. This humble creature was of a uniformly cheerful and active
  disposition, unacquainted alike with the cares of wealth and the pressure of
  misfortune. Though her pretensions were small, and her information slender,
  she was by no means deficient in penetration. She remarked the faults and
  follies of mankind with no contemptible discernment; but her temper was of
  so mild and forgiving a cast, as would have induced most persons to believe
  that she perceived nothing of the matter. Her heart overflowed with the milk
  of kindness. She was sincere and ardent in her attachments, and never did
  she omit a service which she perceived herself able to render to a human
  being.
Had it not been for these qualifications of temper, I should probably
  have found that my appearance, that of a deserted, solitary lad, of Jewish
  extraction, effectually precluded my demands upon her kindness. But I
  speedily perceived, from her manner of receiving and returning civilities of
  an indifferent sort, that her heart was too noble to have its effusions
  checked by any base and unworthy considerations. Encouraged by these
  preliminaries, I determined to select her as my agent. I found her willing
  and alert in the business I proposed to her. That I might anticipate
  occasions of suspicion, I frankly told her that, for reasons which I wished
  to be excused from relating, but which, if related, I was sure would not
  deprive me of her good opinion, I found it necessary, for the present, to
  keep myself private. With this statement she readily acquiesced, and told me
  that she had no desire for any further information than I found it expedient
  to give.
My first productions were of the poetical kind. After having finished two
  or three, I directed this generous creature to take them to the office of a
  newspaper; but they were rejected with contempt by the Aristarchus of that
  place, who, having bestowed on them a superficial glance, told her that such
  matters were not in his way. I cannot help mentioning in this place, that
  the countenance of Mrs. Marney (this was the name of my ambassadress) was in
  all cases a perfect indication of her success, and rendered explanation by
  words wholly unnecessary. She interested herself so unreservedly in what she
  undertook, that she felt either miscarriage or good fortune much more
  exquisitely than I did. I had an unhesitating confidence in my own
  resources, and, occupied as I was in meditations more interesting and more
  painful, I regarded these matters as altogether trivial.
I quietly took the pieces back, and laid them upon my table. Upon
  revisal, I altered and transcribed one of them, and, joining it with two
  others, despatched them together to the editor of a magazine. He desired
  they might be left with him till the day after to-morrow. When that day came
  he told my friend they should be inserted; but, Mrs. Marney asking
  respecting the price, he replied, it was their constant rule to give nothing
  for poetical compositions, the letter-box being always full of writings of
  that sort; but if the gentleman would try his hand in prose, a short essay
  or a tale, he would see what he could do for him.
With the requisition of my literary dictator I immediately complied. I
  attempted a paper in the style of Addison's Spectators, which was accepted.
  In a short time I was upon an established footing in this quarter. I however
  distrusted my resources in the way of moral disquisition, and soon turned my
  thoughts to his other suggestion, a tale. His demands upon me were now
  frequent, and, to facilitate my labours, I bethought myself of the resource
  of translation. I had scarcely any convenience with respect to the procuring
  of books; but, as my memory was retentive, I frequently translated or
  modelled my narrative upon a reading of some years before. By a fatality,
  for which I did not exactly know how to account, my thoughts frequently led
  me to the histories of celebrated robbers; and I related, from time to time,
  incidents and anecdotes of Cartouche, Gusman d'Alfarache, and other
  memorable worthies, whose career was terminated upon the gallows or the
  scaffold.
In the mean time a retrospect to my own situation rendered a perseverance
  even in this industry difficult to be maintained. I often threw down my pen
  in an ecstasy of despair. Sometimes for whole days together I was incapable
  of action, and sunk into a sort of partial stupor, too wretched to be
  described. Youth and health however enabled me, from time to time, to get
  the better of my dejection, and to rouse myself to something like a gaiety,
  which, if it had been permanent, might have made this interval of my story
  tolerable to my reflections.

</div></body></text></TEI>