<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="12">CHAPTER XII.
I shall endeavour to state the remainder of this narrative in the words
  of Mr. Collins. The reader has already had occasion to perceive that Mr.
  Collins was a man of no vulgar order; and his reflections on the subject
  were uncommonly judicious.
"This day was the crisis of Mr. Falkland's history. From hence took its
  beginning that gloomy and unsociable melancholy, of which he has since been
  the victim. No two characters can be in certain respects more strongly
  contrasted, than the Mr. Falkland of a date prior and subsequent to these
  events. Hitherto he had been attended by a fortune perpetually prosperous.
  His mind was sanguine; full of that undoubting confidence in its own powers
  which prosperity is qualified to produce. Though the habits of his life were
  those of a serious and sublime visionary they were nevertheless full of
  cheerfulness and tranquillity. But from this moment, his pride, and the
  lofty adventurousness of his spirit, were effectually subdued. From an
  object of envy he was changed into an object of compassion. Life, which
  hitherto no one had more exquisitely enjoyed, became a burden to him. No
  more self-complacency, no more rapture, no more self-approving and
  heart-transporting benevolence! He who had lived beyond any man upon the
  grand and animating reveries of the imagination, seemed now to have no
  visions but of anguish and despair. His case was peculiarly worthy of
  sympathy, since, no doubt, if rectitude and purity of disposition could give
  a title to happiness, few men could exhibit a more consistent and powerful
  claim than Mr. Falkland.
"He was too deeply pervaded with the idle and groundless romances of
  chivalry, ever to forget the situation, humiliating and dishonourable
  according to his ideas, in which he had been placed upon this occasion.
  There is a mysterious sort of divinity annexed to the person of a true
  knight, that makes any species of brute violence committed upon it indelible
  and immortal. To be knocked down, cuffed, kicked, dragged along the floor!
  Sacred heaven, the memory of such a treatment was not to be endured! No
  future lustration could ever remove the stain: and, what was perhaps still
  worse in the present case, the offender having ceased to exist, the
  lustration which the laws of knight-errantry prescribe was rendered
  impossible.
"In some future period of human improvement, it is probable, that that
  calamity will be in a manner unintelligible, which in the present instance
  contributed to tarnish and wither the excellence of one of the most elevated
  and amiable of human minds. If Mr. Falkland had reflected with perfect
  accuracy upon the case, he would probably have been able to look down with
  indifference upon a wound, which, as it was, pierced to his very vitals. How
  much more dignity, than in the modern duellist, do we find in Themistocles,
  the most gallant of the Greeks; who, when Eurybiades, his commander in
  chief, in answer to some of his remonstrances, lifted his cane over him with
  a menacing air, accosted him in that noble apostrophe, 'Strike, but
  hear!'
"How would a man of true discernment in such a case reply to his brutal
  assailant? 'I make it my boast that I can endure calamity and pain: shall I
  not be able to endure the trifling inconvenience that your folly can inflict
  upon me? Perhaps a human being would be more accomplished, if he understood
  the science of personal defence; but how few would be the occasions upon
  which he would be called to exert it? How few persons would he encounter so
  unjust and injurious as you, if his own conduct were directed by the
  principles of reason and benevolence? Beside, how narrow would be the use of
  this science when acquired? It will scarcely put the man of delicate make
  and petty stature upon a level with the athletic pugilist; and, if it did in
  some measure secure me against the malice of a single adversary, still my
  person and my life, so far as mere force is concerned, would always be at
  the mercy of two. Further than immediate defence against actual violence, it
  could never be of use to me. The man who can deliberately meet his adversary
  for the purpose of exposing the person of one or both of them to injury,
  tramples upon every principle of reason and equity. Duelling is the vilest
  of all egotism, treating the public, who has a claim to all my powers and
  exertions, as if it were nothing, and myself, or rather an unintelligible
  chimera I annex to myself, as if it were entitled to my exclusive attention.
  I am unable to cope with you: what then? Can that circumstance dishonour me?
  No; I can only be dishonoured by perpetrating an unjust action. My honour is
  in my own keeping, beyond the reach of all mankind. Strike! I am passive. No
  injury that you can inflict, shall provoke me to expose you or myself to
  unnecessary evil. I refuse that; but I am not therefore pusillanimous: when
  I refuse any danger or suffering by which the general good may be promoted,
  then brand me for a coward!
"These reasonings, however simple and irresistible they must be found by
  a dispassionate enquirer, are little reflected on by the world at large, and
  were most of all uncongenial to the prejudices of Mr. Falkland.
"But the public disgrace and chastisement that had been imposed upon him,
  intolerable as they were to be recollected, were not the whole of the
  mischief that redounded to our unfortunate patron from the transactions of
  that day. It was presently whispered that he was no other than the murderer
  of his antagonist. This rumour was of too much importance to the very
  continuance of his life, to justify its being concealed from him. He heard
  it with inexpressible astonishment and horror; it formed a dreadful addition
  to the load of intellectual anguish that already oppressed him. No man had
  ever held his reputation more dear than Mr. Falkland; and now, in one day,
  he was fallen under the most exquisite calamities, a complicated personal
  insult, and the imputation of the foulest of crimes. He might have fled; for
  no one was forward to proceed against a man so adored as Mr. Falkland, or in
  revenge of one so universally execrated as Mr. Tyrrel. But flight he
  disdained. In the mean time the affair was of the most serious magnitude,
  and the rumour unchecked seemed daily to increase in strength. Mr. Falkland
  appeared sometimes inclined to adopt such steps as might have been best
  calculated to bring the imputation to a speedy trial. But he probably
  feared, by too direct an appeal to judicature, to render more precise an
  imputation, the memory of which he deprecated; at the same time that he was
  sufficiently willing to meet the severest scrutiny, and, if he could not
  hope to have it forgotten that he had ever been accused, to prove in the
  most satisfactory manner that the accusation was unjust.
"The neighbouring magistrates at length conceived it necessary to take
  some steps upon the subject. Without causing Mr. Falkland to be apprehended,
  they sent to desire he would appear before them at one of their meetings.
  The proceeding being thus opened, Mr. Falkland expressed his hope that, if
  the business were likely to stop there, their investigation might at least
  be rendered as solemn as possible. The meeting was numerous; every person of
  a respectable class in society was admitted to be an auditor; the whole
  town, one of the most considerable in the county, was apprised of the nature
  of the business. Few trials, invested with all the forms of judgment, have
  excited so general an interest. A trial, under the present circumstances,
  was scarcely attainable; and it seemed to be the wish both of principal and
  umpires, to give to this transaction all the momentary notoriety and
  decisiveness of a trial.
"The magistrates investigated the particulars of the story. Mr. Falkland,
  it appeared, had left the rooms immediately after his assailant; and though
  he had been attended by one or two of the gentlemen to his inn, it was
  proved that he had left them upon some slight occasion, as soon as he
  arrived at it, and that, when they enquired for him of the waiters, he had
  already mounted his horse and ridden home.
"By the nature of the case, no particular facts could be stated in
  balance against these. As soon as they had been sufficiently detailed, Mr.
  Falkland therefore proceeded to his defence. Several copies of his defence
  were-made, and Mr. Falkland seemed, for a short time, to have had the idea
  of sending it to the press, though, for some reason or other, he afterwards
  suppressed it. I have one of the copies in my possession, and I will read it
  to you."
Saying this, Mr. Collins rose, and took it from a private drawer in his
  escritoire. During this action he appeared to recollect himself. He did not,
  in the strict sense of the word, hesitate; but he was prompted to make some
  apology for what he was doing.
"You seem never to have heard of this memorable transaction; and, indeed,
  that is little to be wondered at, since the good nature of the world is
  interested in suppressing it, and it is deemed a disgrace to a man to have
  defended himself from a criminal imputation, though with circumstances the
  most satisfactory and honourable. It may be supposed that this suppression
  is particularly acceptable to Mr. Falkland; and I should not have acted in
  contradiction to his modes of thinking in communicating the story to you,
  had there not been circumstances of peculiar urgency, that seemed to render
  the communication desirable." Saying this, he proceeded to read from the
  paper in his hand.
"Gentlemen,
"I stand here accused of a crime, the most black that any human creature
  is capable of perpetrating. I am innocent. I have no fear that I shall fail
  to make every person in this company acknowledge my innocence. In the mean
  time, what must be my feelings? Conscious as I am of deserving approbation
  and not censure, of having passed my life in acts of justice and
  philanthropy, can any thing be more deplorable than for me to answer to a
  charge of murder? So wretched is my situation, that I cannot accept your
  gratuitous acquittal, if you should be disposed to bestow it. I must answer
  to an imputation, the very thought of which is ten thousand times worse to
  me than death. I must exert the whole energy of my mind, to prevent my being
  ranked with the vilest of men.
"Gentlemen, this is a situation in which a man may be allowed to boast.
  Accursed situation! No man need envy me the vile and polluted triumph I am
  now to gain! I have called no witnesses to my character. Great God! what
  sort of character is that which must be supported by witnesses? But, if I
  must speak, look round the company, ask of every one present, enquire of
  your own hearts! Not one word of reproach was ever whispered against me. I
  do not hesitate to call upon those who have known me most, to afford me the
  most honourable testimony.
"My life has been spent in the keenest and most unintermitted sensibility
  to reputation. I am almost indifferent as to what shall be the event of this
  day. I would not open my mouth upon the occasion, if my life were the only
  thing that was at stake. It is not in the power of your decision to restore
  to me my unblemished reputation, to obliterate the disgrace I have suffered,
  or to prevent it from being remembered that I have been brought to
  examination upon a charge of murder. Your decision can never have the
  efficacy to prevent the miserable remains of my existence from being the
  most intolerable of all burthens.
"I am accused of having committed murder upon the body of Barnabas
  Tyrrel. I would most joyfully have given every farthing I possess, and
  devoted myself to perpetual beggary, to have preserved his life. His life
  was precious to me, beyond that of all mankind. In my opinion, the greatest
  injustice committed by his unknown assassin was that of defrauding me of my
  just revenge. I confess that I would have called him out to the field, and
  that our encounter should not have been terminated but by the death of one
  or both of us. This would have been a pitiful and inadequate compensation
  for his unparalleled insult, but it was all that remained.
"I ask for no pity, but I must openly declare that never was any
  misfortune so horrible as mine. I would willingly have taken refuge from the
  recollection of that night in a voluntary death. Life was now stripped of
  all those recommendations, for the sake of which it was dear to me. But even
  this consolation is denied me. I am compelled to drag for ever the
  intolerable load of existence, upon penalty, if at any period, however
  remote, I shake it off, of having that impatience regarded as confirming a
  charge of murder. Gentlemen, if by your decision you could take away my
  life, without that act being connected with my disgrace, I would bless the
  cord that stopped the breath of my existence for ever.
"You all know how easily I might have fled from this purgation. If I had
  been guilty, should I not have embraced the opportunity? But, as it was, I
  could not. Reputation has been the idol, the jewel of my life. I could never
  have borne to think that a human creature, in the remotest part of the
  globe, should believe that I was a criminal. Alas! what a deity it is that I
  have chosen for my worship! I have entailed upon myself everlasting agony
  and despair!
"I have but one word to add. Gentlemen, I charge you to do me the
  imperfect justice that is in your power! My life is a worthless thing. But
  my honour, the empty remains of honour I have now to boast, is in your
  judgment, and you will each of you, from this day, have imposed upon
  yourselves the task of its vindicators. It is little that you can do for me;
  but it is not less your duty to do that little. May that God who is the
  fountain of honour and good prosper and protect you! The man who now stands
  before you is devoted to perpetual barrenness and blast! He has nothing to
  hope for beyond the feeble consolation of this day!"
"You will easily imagine that Mr. Falkland was discharged with every
  circumstance of credit. Nothing is more to be deplored in human
  institutions, than that the ideas of mankind should have annexed a sentiment
  of disgrace to a purgation thus satisfactory and decisive. No one
  entertained the shadow of a doubt upon the subject, and yet a mere
  concurrence of circumstances made it necessary that the best of men should
  be publicly put on his defence, as if really under suspicion of an atrocious
  crime. It may be granted indeed that Mr. Falkland had his faults, but those
  very faults placed him at a still further distance from the criminality in
  question. He was the fool of honour and fame: a man whom, in the pursuit of
  reputation, nothing could divert; who would have purchased the character of
  a true, gallant, and undaunted hero, at the expense of worlds, and who
  thought every calamity nominal but a stain upon his honour. How atrociously
  absurd to suppose any motive capable of inducing such a man to play the part
  of a lurking assassin? How unfeeling to oblige him to defend himself from
  such an imputation? Did any man, and, least of all, a man of the purest
  honour, ever pass in a moment, from a life unstained by a single act of
  injury, to the consummation of human depravity?
"When the decision of the magistrates was declared, a general murmur of
  applause and involuntary transport burst forth from every one present. It
  was at first low, and gradually became louder. As it was the expression of
  rapturous delight, and an emotion disinterested and divine, so there was an
  indescribable something in the very sound, that carried it home to the
  heart, and convinced every spectator that there was no merely personal
  pleasure which ever existed, that would not be foolish and feeble in the
  comparison. Every one strove who should most express his esteem of the
  amiable accused. Mr. Falkland was no sooner withdrawn than the gentlemen
  present determined to give a still further sanction to the business, by
  their congratulations. They immediately named a deputation to wait upon him
  for that purpose. Every one concurred to assist the general sentiment. It
  was a sort of sympathetic feeling that took hold upon all ranks and degrees.
  The multitude received him with huzzas, they took his horses from his
  carriage, dragged him along in triumph, and attended him many miles on his
  return to his own habitation. It seemed as if a public examination upon a
  criminal charge, which had hitherto been considered in every event as a
  brand of disgrace, was converted, in the present instance, into an occasion
  of enthusiastic adoration and unexampled honour.
"Nothing could reach the heart of Mr. Falkland. He was not insensible to
  the general kindness and exertions; but it was too evident that the
  melancholy that had taken hold of his mind was invincible.
"It was only a few weeks after this memorable scene that the real
  murderer was discovered. Every part of this story was extraordinary. The
  real murderer was Hawkins. He was found with his son, under a feigned name,
  at a village about thirty miles distant, in want of all the necessaries of
  life. He had lived there, from the period of his flight, in so private a
  manner, that all the enquiries that had been set on foot, by the benevolence
  of Mr. Falkland, or the insatiable malice of Mr. Tyrrel, had been
  insufficient to discover him. The first thing that had led to the detection
  was a parcel of clothes covered with blood, that were found in a ditch, and
  that, when drawn out, were known by the people of the village to belong to
  this man. The murder of Mr. Tyrrel was not a circumstance that could be
  unknown, and suspicion was immediately roused. A diligent search being made,
  the rusty handle, with part of the blade of a knife, was found thrown in a
  corner of his lodging, which, being applied to a piece of the point of a
  knife that had been broken in the wound, appeared exactly to correspond.
  Upon further enquiry two rustics, who had been accidentally on the spot,
  remembered to have seen Hawkins and his son in the town that very evening
  and to have called after them, and received no answer, though they were sure
  of their persons. Upon this accumulated evidence both Hawkins and his son
  were tried, condemned, and afterwards executed. In the interval between the
  sentence and execution Hawkins confessed his guilt with many marks of
  compunction; though there are persons by whom this is denied; but I have
  taken some pains to enquire into the fact, and am persuaded that their
  disbelief is precipitate and groundless.
"The cruel injustice that this man had suffered from his village-tyrant
  was not forgotten upon the present occasion. It was by a strange fatality
  that the barbarous proceedings of Mr. Tyrrel seemed never to fall short of
  their completion; and even his death served eventually to consummate the
  ruin of a man he hated; a circumstance which, if it could have come to his
  knowledge, would perhaps have in some measure consoled him for his untimely
  end. This poor Hawkins was surely entitled to some pity, since his being
  finally urged to desperation, and brought, together with his son, to an
  ignominious fate, was originally owing to the sturdiness of his virtue and
  independence. But the compassion of the public was in a great measure shut
  against him, as they thought it a piece of barbarous and unpardonable
  selfishness, that he had not rather come boldly forward to meet the
  consequences of his own conduct, than suffer a man of so much public worth
  as Mr. Falkland, and who had been so desirous of doing him good, to be
  exposed to the risk of being tried for a murder that he had committed.
"From this time to the present Mr. Falkland has been nearly such as you
  at present see him. Though it be several years since these transactions, the
  impression they made is for ever fresh in the mind of our unfortunate
  patron. From thenceforward his habits became totally different. He had
  before been fond of public scenes, and acting a part in the midst of the
  people among whom he immediately resided. He now made himself a rigid
  recluse. He had no associates, no friends. Inconsolable himself, he yet
  wished to treat others with kindness. There was a solemn sadness in his
  manner, attended with the most perfect gentleness and humanity. Every body
  respects him, for his benevolence is unalterable; but there is a stately
  coldness and reserve in his behaviour, which makes it difficult for those
  about him to regard him with the familiarity of affection. These symptoms
  are uninterrupted, except at certain times when his sufferings become
  intolerable, and he displays the marks of a furious insanity. At those times
  his language is fearful and mysterious, and he seems to figure to himself by
  turns every sort of persecution and alarm, which may be supposed to attend
  upon an accusation of murder. But, sensible of his own weakness, he is
  anxious at such times to withdraw into solitude: and his domestics in
  general know nothing of him, but the uncommunicative and haughty, but mild,
  dejection that accompanies every thing he does."

</div></body></text></TEI>