<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="31">CHAPTER III.
One day, while I continued in this situation, a circumstance occurred
  which involuntarily attracted my attention. Two of our people had been sent
  to a town at some distance, for the purpose of procuring us the things of
  which we were in want. After having delivered these to our landlady, they
  retired to one corner of the room; and, one of them pulling a printed paper
  from his pocket, they mutually occupied themselves in examining its
  contents. I was sitting in an easy chair by the fire, being considerably
  better than I had been, though still in a weak and languid state. Having
  read for a considerable time, they looked at me, and then at the paper, and
  then at me again. They then went out of the room together, as if to consult
  without interruption upon something which that paper suggested to them. Some
  time after they returned; and my protector, who had been absent upon the
  former occasion, entered the room at the same instant.
"Captain!" said one of them with an air of pleasure, "look here! we have
  found a prize! I believe it is as good as a bank-note of a hundred
  guineas."
Mr. Raymond (that was his name) took the paper, and read. He paused for a
  moment. He then crushed the paper in his hand; and, turning to the person
  from whom he had received it, said, with the tone of a man confident in the
  success of his reasons,—
"What use have you for these hundred guineas? Are you in want? Are you in
  distress? Can you be contented to purchase them at the price of
  treachery—of violating the laws of hospitality?"
"Faith, captain, I do not very well know. After having violated other
  laws, I do not see why we should be frightened at an old saw. We pretend to
  judge for ourselves, and ought to be above shrinking from a bugbear of a
  proverb. Beside, this is a good deed, and I should think no more harm of
  being the ruin of such a thief than of getting my dinner."
"A thief! You talk of thieves!"
"Not so fast, captain. God defend that I should say a word against
  thieving as a general occupation! But one man steals in one way, and another
  in another. For my part, I go upon the highway, and take from any stranger I
  meet what, it is a hundred to one, he can very well spare. I see nothing to
  be found fault with in that. But I have as much conscience as another man.
  Because I laugh at assizes, and great wigs, and the gallows, and because I
  will not be frightened from an innocent action when the lawyers say me nay,
  does it follow that I am to have a fellow-feeling for pilferers, and
  rascally servants, and people that have neither justice nor principle? No; I
  have too much respect for the trade not to be a foe to interlopers, and
  people that so much the more deserve my hatred, because the world calls them
  by my name."
"You are wrong, Larkins! You certainly ought not to employ against people
  that you hate, supposing your hatred to be reasonable, the instrumentality
  of that law which in your practice you defy. Be consistent. Either be the
  friend of the law, or its adversary. Depend upon it that, wherever there are
  laws at all, there will be laws against such people as you and me. Either
  therefore we all of us deserve the vengeance of the law, or law is not the
  proper instrument for correcting the misdeeds of mankind. I tell you this,
  because I would fain have you aware, that an informer or a king's evidence,
  a man who takes advantage of the confidence of another in order to betray
  him, who sells the life of his neighbour for money, or, coward-like, upon
  any pretence calls in the law to do that for him which he cannot or dares
  not do for himself, is the vilest of rascals. But in the present case, if
  your reasons were the best in the world, they do not apply."
While Mr. Raymond was speaking, the rest of the gang came into the room.
  He immediately turned to them, and said,—
"My friends, here is a piece of intelligence that Larkins has just
  brought in which, with his leave, I will lay before you."
Then unfolding the paper he had received, he continued: "This is the
  description of a felon, with the offer of a hundred guineas for his
  apprehension. Larking picked it up at ----. By the time and other
  circumstances, but particularly by the minute description of his person,
  there can be no doubt but the object of it is our young friend, whose life I
  was a while ago the instrument of saving. He is charged here with having
  taken advantage of the confidence of his patron and benefactor to rob him of
  property to a large amount. Upon this charge he was committed to the county
  jail, from whence he made his escape about a fortnight ago, without
  venturing to stand his trial; a circumstance which is stated by the
  advertiser as tantamount to a confession of his guilt.
"My friends, I was acquainted with the particulars of this story some
  time before. This lad let me into his history, at a time that he could not
  possibly foresee that he should stand in need of that precaution as an
  antidote against danger. He is not guilty of what is laid to his charge.
  Which of you is so ignorant as to suppose, that his escape is any
  confirmation of his guilt? Who ever thinks, when he is apprehended for
  trial, of his innocence or guilt as being at all material to the issue? Who
  ever was fool enough to volunteer a trial, where those who are to decide
  think more of the horror of the thing of which he is accused, than whether
  he were the person that did it; and where the nature of our motives is to be
  collected from a set of ignorant witnesses, that no wise man would trust for
  a fair representation of the most indifferent action of his life?
"The poor lad's story is a long one, and I will not trouble you with it
  now. But from that story it is as clear as the day, that, because he wished
  to leave the service of his master, because he had been perhaps a little too
  inquisitive in his master's concerns, and because, as I suspect, he had been
  trusted with some important secrets, his master conceived an antipathy
  against him. The antipathy gradually proceeded to such a length, as to
  induce the master to forge this vile accusation. He seemed willing to hang
  the lad out of the way, rather than suffer him to go where he pleased, or
  get beyond the reach of his power. Williams has told me the story with such
  ingenuousness, that I am as sure that he is guiltless of what they lay to
  his charge, as that I am so myself. Nevertheless the man's servants who were
  called in to hear the accusation, and his relation, who as justice of the
  peace made out the mittimus, and who had the folly to think he could be
  impartial, gave it on his side with one voice, and thus afforded Williams a
  sample of what he had to expect in the sequel.
"Larkins, who when he received this paper had no previous knowledge of
  particulars, was for taking advantage of it for the purpose of earning the
  hundred guineas. Are you of that mind now you have heard them? Will you for
  so paltry a consideration deliver up the lamb into the jaws of the wolf?
  Will you abet the purposes of this sanguinary rascal, who, not contented
  with driving his late dependent from house and home, depriving him of
  character and all the ordinary means of subsistence, and leaving him almost
  without a refuge, still thirsts for his blood? If no other person have the
  courage to set limits to the tyranny of courts of justice, shall not we?
  Shall we, who earn our livelihood by generous daring, be indebted for a
  penny to the vile artifices of the informer? Shall we, against whom the
  whole species is in arms, refuse our protection to an individual, more
  exposed to, but still less deserving of, their persecution than
  ourselves?"
The representation of the captain produced an instant effect upon the
  whole company. They all exclaimed, "Betray him! No, not for worlds! He is
  safe. We will protect him at the hazard of our lives. If fidelity and honour
  be banished from thieves, where shall they find refuge upon the face of the
  earth?"6 Larkins in particular thanked the captain for
  his interference, and swore that he would rather part with his right hand
  than injure so worthy a lad or assist such an unheard-of villainy. Saying
  this, he took me by the hand and bade me fear nothing. Under their roof no
  harm should ever befal me; and, even if the understrappers of the law should
  discover my retreat, they would to a man die in my defence, sooner than a
  hair of my head should be hurt. I thanked him most sincerely for his
  good-will; but I was principally struck with the fervent benevolence of my
  benefactor. I told them, I found that my enemies were inexorable, and would
  never be appeased but with my blood; and I assured them with the most solemn
  and earnest veracity, that I had done nothing to deserve the persecution
  which was exercised against me.
The spirit and energy of Mr. Raymond had been such as to leave no part
  for me to perform in repelling this unlooked-for danger. Nevertheless, it
  left a very serious impression upon my mind. I had always placed some
  confidence in the returning equity of Mr. Falkland. Though he persecuted me
  with bitterness, I could not help believing that he did it unwillingly, and
  I was persuaded it would not be for ever. A man, whose original principles
  had been so full of rectitude and honour, could not fail at some time to
  recollect the injustice of his conduct, and to remit his asperity. This idea
  had been always present to me, and had in no small degree conspired to
  instigate my exertions. I said, "I will convince my persecutor that I am of
  more value than that I should be sacrificed purely by way of precaution."
  These expectations on my part had been encouraged by Mr. Falkland's
  behaviour upon the question of my imprisonment, and by various particulars
  which had occurred since.
But this new incident gave the subject a totally different appearance. I
  saw him, not contented with blasting my reputation, confining me for a
  period in jail, and reducing me to the situation of a houseless vagabond,
  still continuing his pursuit under these forlorn circumstances with
  unmitigable cruelty. Indignation and resentment seemed now for the first
  time to penetrate my mind. I knew his misery so well, I was so fully
  acquainted with its cause, and strongly impressed with the idea of its being
  unmerited, that, while I suffered deeply, I still continued to pity, rather
  than hate my persecutor. But this incident introduced some change into my
  feelings. I said, "Surely he might now believe that he had sufficiently
  disarmed me, and might at length suffer me to be at peace. At least, ought
  he not to be contented to leave me to my fate, the perilous and uncertain
  condition of an escaped felon, instead of thus whetting the animosity and
  vigilance of my countrymen against me? Were his interference on my behalf in
  opposition to the stern severity of Mr. Forester, and his various acts of
  kindness since, a mere part that he played in order to lull me into
  patience? Was he perpetually haunted with the fear of an ample retaliation,
  and for that purpose did he personate remorse, at the very moment that he
  was secretly keeping every engine at play that could secure my destruction?"
  The very suspicion of such a fact filled me with inexpressible horror, and
  struck a sudden chill through every fibre of my frame.
My wound was by this time completely healed, and it became absolutely
  necessary that I should form some determination respecting the future. My
  habits of thinking were such as gave me an uncontrollable repugnance to the
  vocation of my hosts. I did not indeed feel that aversion and abhorrence to
  the men which are commonly entertained. I saw and respected their good
  qualities and their virtues. I was by no means inclined to believe them
  worse men, or more hostile in their dispositions to the welfare of their
  species, than the generality of those that look down upon them with most
  censure. But, though I did not cease to love them as individuals, my eyes
  were perfectly open to their mistakes. If I should otherwise have been in
  danger of being misled, it was my fortune to have studied felons in a jail
  before I studied them in their state of comparative prosperity; and this was
  an infallible antidote to the poison. I saw that in this profession were
  exerted uncommon energy, ingenuity, and fortitude, and I could not help
  recollecting how admirably beneficial such qualities might be made in the
  great theatre of human affairs; while, in their present direction, they were
  thrown away upon purposes diametrically at war with the first interests of
  human society. Nor were their proceedings less injurious to their own
  interest than incompatible with the general welfare. The man who risks or
  sacrifices his life for the public cause, is rewarded with the testimony of
  an approving conscience; but persons who wantonly defy the necessary, though
  atrociously exaggerated, precautions of government in the matter of
  property, at the same time that they commit an alarming hostility against
  the whole, are, as to their own concerns, scarcely less absurd and
  self-neglectful than the man who should set himself up as a mark for a file
  of musqueteers to shoot at.
Viewing the subject in this light, I not only determined that I would
  have no share in their occupation myself, but thought I could not do less,
  in return for the benefits I had received from them, than endeavour to
  dissuade them from an employment in which they must themselves be the
  greatest sufferers. My expostulation met with a various reception. All the
  persons to whom it was addressed had been tolerably successful in persuading
  themselves of the innocence of their calling; and what remained of doubt in
  their mind was smothered, and, so to speak, laboriously forgotten. Some of
  them laughed at my arguments, as a ridiculous piece of missionary quixotism.
  Others, and particularly our captain, repelled them with the boldness of a
  man that knows he has got the strongest side. But this sentiment of ease and
  self-satisfaction did not long remain. They had been used to arguments
  derived from religion and the sacredness of law. They had long ago shaken
  these from them as so many prejudices. But my view of the subject appealed
  to principles which they could not contest, and had by no means the air of
  that customary reproof which is for ever dinned in our ears without finding
  one responsive chord in our hearts. Urged, as they now were, with objections
  unexpected and cogent, some of those to whom I addressed them began to grow
  peevish and impatient of the intrusive remonstrance. But this was by no
  means the case with Mr. Raymond. He was possessed of a candour that I have
  seldom seen equalled. He was surprised to hear objections so powerful to
  that which, as a matter of speculation, he believed he had examined on all
  sides. He revolved them with impartiality and care. He admitted them slowly,
  but he at length fully admitted them. He had now but one rejoinder in
  reserve.
"Alas! Williams," said he, "it would have been fortunate for me if these
  views had been presented to me, previously to my embracing my present
  profession. It is now too late. Those very laws which, by a perception of
  their iniquity, drove me to what I am, preclude my return. God, we are told,
  judges of men by what they are at the period of arraignment, and whatever be
  their crimes, if they have seen and abjured the folly of those crimes,
  receives them to favour. But the institutions of countries that profess to
  worship this God admit no such distinctions. They leave no room for
  amendment, and seem to have a brutal delight in confounding the demerits of
  offenders. It signifies not what is the character of the individual at the
  hour of trial. How changed, how spotless, and how useful, avails him
  nothing. If they discover at the distance of fourteen7 or of forty
  years8 an action for which the law ordains that his
  life shall be the forfeit, though the interval should have been spent with
  the purity of a saint and the devotedness of a patriot, they disdain to
  enquire into it. What then can I do? Am I not compelled to go on in folly,
  having once begun?"

</div></body></text></TEI>