<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="6">CHAPTER VI.
The consequences of all this speedily manifested themselves. The very
  next incident in the story was in some degree decisive of the catastrophe.
  Hitherto I have spoken only of preliminary matters, seemingly unconnected
  with each other, though leading to that state of mind in both parties which
  had such fatal effects. But all that remains is rapid and tremendous. The
  death-dealing mischief advances with an accelerated motion, appearing to
  defy human wisdom and strength to obstruct its operation.
The vices of Mr. Tyrrel, in their present state of augmentation, were
  peculiarly exercised upon his domestics and dependents. But the principal
  sufferer was the young lady mentioned on a former occasion, the orphan
  daughter of his father's sister. Miss Melville's mother had married
  imprudently, or rather unfortunately, against the consent of her relations,
  all of whom had agreed to withdraw their countenance from her in consequence
  of that precipitate step. Her husband had turned out to be no better than an
  adventurer; had spent her fortune, which in consequence of the
  irreconcilableness of her family was less than he expected, and had broken
  her heart. Her infant daughter was left without any resource. In this
  situation the representations of the people with whom she happened to be
  placed, prevailed upon Mrs. Tyrrel, the mother of the squire, to receive her
  into her family. In equity, perhaps, she was entitled to that portion of
  fortune which her mother had forfeited by her imprudence, and which had gone
  to swell the property of the male representative. But this idea had never
  entered into the conceptions of either mother or son. Mrs. Tyrrel conceived
  that she performed an act of the most exalted benevolence in admitting Miss
  Emily into a sort of equivocal situation, which was neither precisely that
  of a domestic, nor yet marked with the treatment that might seem due to one
  of the family.
She had not, however, at first been sensible of all the mortifications
  that might have been expected from her condition. Mrs. Tyrrel, though proud
  and imperious, was not ill-natured. The female, who lived in the family in
  the capacity of housekeeper, was a person who had seen better days, and
  whose disposition was extremely upright and amiable. She early contracted a
  friendship for the little Emily, who was indeed for the most part committed
  to her care. Emily, on her side, fully repaid the affection of her
  instructress, and learned with great docility the few accomplishments Mrs.
  Jakeman was able to communicate. But most of all she imbibed her cheerful
  and artless temper, that extracted the agreeable and encouraging from all
  events, and prompted her to communicate her sentiments, which were never of
  the cynical cast, without modification or disguise. Besides the advantages
  Emily derived from Mrs. Jakeman, she was permitted to take lessons from the
  masters who were employed at Tyrrel Place for the instruction of her cousin;
  and indeed, as the young gentleman was most frequently indisposed to attend
  to them, they would commonly have had nothing to do, had it not been for the
  fortunate presence of Miss Melville. Mrs. Tyrrel therefore encouraged the
  studies of Emily on that score; in addition to which she imagined that this
  living exhibition of instruction might operate as an indirect allurement to
  her darling Barnabas, the only species of motive she would suffer to be
  presented. Force she absolutely forbade; and of the intrinsic allurements of
  literature and knowledge she had no conception.
Emily, as she grew up, displayed an uncommon degree of sensibility, which
  under her circumstances would have been a source of perpetual
  dissatisfaction, had it not been qualified with an extreme sweetness and
  easiness of temper. She was far from being entitled to the appellation of a
  beauty. Her person was petite and trivial; her complexion savoured of
  the brunette; and her face was marked with the small-pox,
  sufficiently to destroy its evenness and polish, though not enough to
  destroy its expression. But, though her appearance was not beautiful, it did
  not fail to be in a high degree engaging. Her complexion was at once
  healthful and delicate; her long dark eye-brows adapted themselves with
  facility to the various conceptions of her mind; and her looks bore the
  united impression of an active discernment and a good-humoured frankness.
  The instruction she had received, as it was entirely of a casual nature,
  exempted her from the evils of untutored ignorance, but not from a sort of
  native wildness, arguing a mind incapable of guile itself, or of suspecting
  it in others. She amused, without seeming conscious of the refined sense
  which her observations contained; or rather, having never been debauched
  with applause, she set light by her own qualifications, and talked from the
  pure gaiety of a youthful heart acting upon the stores of a just
  understanding, and not with any expectation of being distinguished and
  admired.
The death of her aunt made very little change in her situation. This
  prudent lady, who would have thought it little less than sacrilege to have
  considered Miss Melville as a branch of the stock of the Tyrrels, took no
  more notice of her in her will than barely putting her down for one hundred
  pounds in a catalogue of legacies to her servants. She had never been
  admitted into the intimacy and confidence of Mrs. Tyrrel; and the young
  squire, now that she was left under his sole protection, seemed inclined to
  treat her with even more liberality than his mother had done. He had seen
  her grow up under his eye, and therefore, though there were but six years
  difference in their ages, he felt a kind of paternal interest in her
  welfare. Habit had rendered her in a manner necessary to him, and, in every
  recess from the occupations of the field and the pleasures of the table, he
  found himself solitary and forlorn without the society of Miss Melville.
  Nearness of kindred, and Emily's want of personal beauty, prevented him from
  ever looking on her with the eyes of desire. Her accomplishments were
  chiefly of the customary and superficial kind, dancing and music. Her skill
  in the first led him sometimes to indulge her with a vacant corner in his
  carriage, when he went to the neighbouring assembly; and, in whatever light
  he might himself think proper to regard her, he would have imagined his
  chambermaid, introduced by him, entitled to an undoubted place in the most
  splendid circle. Her musical talents were frequently employed for his
  amusement. She had the honour occasionally of playing him to sleep after the
  fatigues of the chase; and, as he had some relish for harmonious sounds, she
  was frequently able to soothe him by their means from the perturbations of
  which his gloomy disposition was so eminently a slave. Upon the whole, she
  might be considered as in some sort his favourite. She was the mediator to
  whom his tenants and domestics, when they had incurred his displeasure, were
  accustomed to apply; the privileged companion, that could approach this lion
  with impunity in the midst of his roarings. She spoke to him without fear;
  her solicitations were always good-natured and disinterested; and when he
  repulsed her, he disarmed himself of half his terrors, and was contented to
  smile at her presumption.
Such had been for some years the situation of Miss Melville. Its
  precariousness had been beguiled by the uncommon forbearance with which she
  was treated by her savage protector. But his disposition, always brutal, had
  acquired a gradual accession of ferocity since the settlement of Mr.
  Falkland in his neighbourhood. He now frequently forgot the gentleness with
  which he had been accustomed to treat his good-natured cousin. Her little
  playful arts were not always successful in softening his rage; and he would
  sometimes turn upon her blandishments with an impatient sternness that made
  her tremble. The careless ease of her disposition, however, soon effaced
  these impressions, and she fell without variation into her old habits.
A circumstance occurred about this time which gave peculiar strength to
  the acrimony of Mr. Tyrrel, and ultimately brought to its close the felicity
  that Miss Melville, in spite of the frowns of fortune, had hitherto enjoyed.
  Emily was exactly seventeen when Mr. Falkland returned from the continent.
  At this age she was peculiarly susceptible of the charms of beauty, grace,
  and moral excellence, when united in a person of the other sex. She was
  imprudent, precisely because her own heart was incapable of guile. She had
  never yet felt the sting of the poverty to which she was condemned, and had
  not reflected on the insuperable distance that custom has placed between the
  opulent and the poorer classes of the community. She beheld Mr. Falkland,
  whenever he was thrown in her way at any of the public meetings, with
  admiration; and, without having precisely explained to herself the
  sentiments she indulged, her eyes followed him through all the changes of
  the scene, with eagerness and impatience. She did not see him, as the rest
  of the assembly did, born to one of the amplest estates in the county, and
  qualified to assert his title to the richest heiress. She thought only of
  Falkland, with those advantages which were most intimately his own, and of
  which no persecution of adverse fortune had the ability to deprive him. In a
  word, she was transported when he was present; he was the perpetual subject
  of her reveries and her dreams; but his image excited no sentiment in her
  mind beyond that of the immediate pleasure she took in his idea.
The notice Mr. Falkland bestowed on her in return, appeared sufficiently
  encouraging to a mind so full of prepossession as that of Emily. There was a
  particular complacency in his looks when directed towards her. He had said
  in a company, of which one of the persons present repeated his remarks to
  Miss Melville, that she appeared to him amiable and interesting; that he
  felt for her unprovided and destitute situation; and that he should have
  been glad to be more particular in his attention to her, had he not been
  apprehensive of doing her a prejudice in the suspicious mind of Mr. Tyrrel.
  All this she considered as the ravishing condescension of a superior nature;
  for, if she did not recollect with sufficient assiduity his gifts of
  fortune, she was, on the other hand, filled with reverence for his
  unrivalled accomplishments. But, while she thus seemingly disclaimed all
  comparison between Mr. Falkland and herself, she probably cherished a
  confused feeling as if some event, that was yet in the womb of fate, might
  reconcile things apparently the most incompatible. Fraught with these
  prepossessions, the civilities that had once or twice occurred in the bustle
  of a public circle, the restoring her fan which she had dropped, or the
  disembarrassing her of an empty tea-cup, made her heart palpitate, and gave
  birth to the wildest chimeras in her deluded imagination.
About this time an event happened, that helped to give a precise
  determination to the fluctuations of Miss Melville's mind. One evening, a
  short time after the death of Mr. Clare, Mr. Falkland had been at the house
  of his deceased friend in his quality of executor, and, by some accidents of
  little intrinsic importance, had been detained three or four hours later
  than he expected. He did not set out upon his return till two o'clock in the
  morning. At this time, in a situation so remote from the metropolis, every
  thing is as silent as it would be in a region wholly uninhabited. The moon
  shone bright; and the objects around being marked with strong variations of
  light and shade, gave a kind of sacred solemnity to the scene. Mr. Falkland
  had taken Collins with him, the business to be settled at Mr. Clare's being
  in some respects similar to that to which this faithful domestic had been
  accustomed in the routine of his ordinary service. They had entered into
  some conversation, for Mr. Falkland was not then in the habit of obliging
  the persons about him by formality and reserve to recollect who he was. The
  attractive solemnity of the scene made him break off the talk somewhat
  abruptly, that he might enjoy it without interruption. They had not ridden
  far, before a hollow wind seemed to rise at a distance, and they could hear
  the hoarse roarings of the sea. Presently the sky on one side assumed the
  appearance of a reddish brown, and a sudden angle in the road placed this
  phenomenon directly before them. As they proceeded, it became more distinct,
  and it was at length sufficiently visible that it was occasioned by a fire.
  Mr. Falkland put spurs to his horse; and, as they approached, the object
  presented every instant a more alarming appearance. The flames ascended with
  fierceness; they embraced a large portion of the horizon; and, as they
  carried up with them numerous little fragments of the materials that fed
  them, impregnated with fire, and of an extremely bright and luminous colour,
  they presented some feeble image of the tremendous eruption of a
  volcano.
The flames proceeded from a village directly in their road. There were
  eight or ten houses already on fire, and the whole seemed to be threatened
  with immediate destruction. The inhabitants were in the utmost
  consternation, having had no previous experience of a similar calamity. They
  conveyed with haste their moveables and furniture into the adjoining fields.
  When any of them had effected this as far as it could be attempted with
  safety, they were unable to conceive any further remedy, but stood wringing
  their hands, and contemplating the ravages of the fire in an agony of
  powerless despair. The water that could be procured, in any mode practised
  in that place, was but as a drop contending with an element in arms. The
  wind in the mean time was rising, and the flames spread with more and more
  rapidity.
Mr. Falkland contemplated this scene for a few moments, as if ruminating
  with himself as to what could be done. He then directed some of the country
  people about him to pull down a house, next to one that was wholly on fire,
  but which itself was yet untouched. They seemed astonished at a direction
  which implied a voluntary destruction of property, and considered the task
  as too much in the heart of the danger to be undertaken. Observing that they
  were motionless, he dismounted from his horse, and called upon them in an
  authoritative voice to follow him. He ascended the house in an instant, and
  presently appeared upon the top of it, as if in the midst of the flames.
  Having, with the assistance of two or three of the persons that followed him
  most closely, and who by this time had supplied themselves with whatever
  tools came next to hand, loosened the support of a stack of chimneys, he
  pushed them headlong into the midst of the fire. He passed and repassed
  along the roof; and, having set people to work in all parts, descended in
  order to see what could be done in any other quarter. At this moment an
  elderly woman burst from the midst of a house in flames: the utmost
  consternation was painted in her looks; and, as soon as she could recollect
  herself enough to have a proper idea of her situation, the subject of her
  anxiety seemed, in an instant, to be totally changed. "Where is my child?"
  cried she, and cast an anxious and piercing look among the surrounding
  crowd. "Oh, she is lost! she is in the midst of flames! Save her! save her!
  my child!" She filled the air with heart-rending shrieks. She turned towards
  the house. The people that were near endeavoured to prevent her, but she
  shook them off in a moment. She entered the passage; viewed the hideous
  ruin; and was then going to plunge into the blazing staircase. Mr. Falkland
  saw, pursued, and seized her by the arm; it was Mrs. Jakeman. "Stop!" he
  cried, with a voice of grand, yet benevolent authority. "Remain you in the
  street! I will seek, and will save her!" Mrs. Jakeman obeyed. He charged the
  persons who were near to detain her; he enquired which was the apartment of
  Emily. Mrs. Jakeman was upon a visit to a sister who lived in the village,
  and had brought Emily along with her. Mr. Falkland ascended a neighbouring
  house, and entered that in which Emily was, by a window in the roof.
He found her already awaked from her sleep; and, becoming sensible of her
  danger, she had that instant wrapped a loose gown round her. Such is the
  almost irresistible result of feminine habits; but, having done this, she
  examined the surrounding objects with the wildness of despair. Mr. Falkland
  entered the chamber. She flew into his arms with the rapidity of lightning.
  She embraced and clung to him, with an impulse that did not wait to consult
  the dictates of her understanding. Her emotions were indescribable. In a few
  short moments she had lived an age in love. In two minutes Mr. Falkland was
  again in the street with his lovely, half-naked burthen in his arms. Having
  restored her to her affectionate protector, snatched from the immediate
  grasp of death, from which, if he had not, none would have delivered her, he
  returned to his former task. By his presence of mind, by his indefatigable
  humanity and incessant exertions, he saved three fourths of the village from
  destruction.
The conflagration being at length abated, he sought again Mrs. Jakeman
  and Emily, who by this time had obtained a substitute for the garments she
  had lost in the fire. He displayed the tenderest solicitude for the young
  lady's safety, and directed Collins to go with as much speed as he could,
  and send his chariot to attend her. More than an hour elapsed in this
  interval. Miss Melville had never seen so much of Mr. Falkland upon any
  former occasion; and the spectacle of such humanity, delicacy, firmness, and
  justice in the form of man, as he crowded into this small space, was
  altogether new to her, and in the highest degree fascinating. She had a
  confused feeling as if there had been something indecorous in her behaviour
  or appearance, when Mr. Falkland had appeared to her relief; and this
  combined with her other emotions to render the whole critical and
  intoxicating.
Emily no sooner arrived at the family mansion, than Mr. Tyrrel ran out to
  receive her. He had just heard of the melancholy accident that had taken
  place at the village, and was terrified for the safety of his good-humoured
  cousin. He displayed those unpremeditated emotions which are common to
  almost every individual of the human race. He was greatly shocked at the
  suspicion that Emily might possibly have become the victim of a catastrophe
  which had thus broken out in the dead of night. His sensations were of the
  most pleasing sort when he folded her in his arms, and fearful apprehension
  was instantaneously converted into joyous certainty. Emily no sooner entered
  under the well known roof than her spirits were brisk, and her tongue
  incessant in describing her danger and her deliverance. Mr. Tyrrel had
  formerly been tortured with the innocent eulogiums she pronounced of Mr.
  Falkland. But these were lameness itself, compared with the rich and various
  eloquence that now flowed from her lips. Love had not the same effect upon
  her, especially at the present moment, which it would have had upon a person
  instructed to feign a blush, and inured to a consciousness of wrong. She
  described his activity and resources, the promptitude with which every thing
  was conceived, and the cautious but daring wisdom with which it was
  executed. All was fairy-land and enchantment in the tenour of her artless
  tale; you saw a beneficent genius surveying and controlling the whole, but
  could have no notion of any human means by which his purposes were
  effected.
Mr. Tyrrel listened for a while to these innocent effusions with
  patience; he could even bear to hear the man applauded, by whom he had just
  obtained so considerable a benefit. But the theme by amplification became
  nauseous, and he at length with some roughness put an end to the tale.
  Probably, upon recollection, it appeared still more insolent and intolerable
  than while it was passing; the sensation of gratitude wore off, but the
  hyperbolical praise that had been bestowed still haunted his memory, and
  sounded in his ear;—Emily had entered into the confederacy that
  disturbed his repose. For herself, she was wholly unconscious of offence,
  and upon every occasion quoted Mr. Falkland as the model of elegant manners
  and true wisdom. She was a total stranger to dissimulation; and she could
  not conceive that any one beheld the subject of her admiration with less
  partiality than herself. Her artless love became more fervent than ever. She
  flattered herself that nothing less than a reciprocal passion could have
  prompted Mr. Falkland to the desperate attempt of saving her from the
  flames; and she trusted that this passion would speedily declare itself, as
  well as induce the object of her adoration to overlook her comparative
  unworthiness.
Mr. Tyrrel endeavoured at first with some moderation to check Miss
  Melville in her applauses, and to convince her by various tokens that the
  subject was disagreeable to him. He was accustomed to treat her with
  kindness. Emily, on her part, was disposed to yield an unreluctant
  obedience, and therefore it was not difficult to restrain her. But upon the
  very next occasion her favourite topic would force its way to her lips. Her
  obedience was the acquiescence of a frank and benevolent heart; but it was
  the most difficult thing in the world to inspire her with fear. Conscious
  herself that she would not hurt a worm, she could not conceive that any one
  would harbour cruelty and rancour against her. Her temper had preserved her
  from obstinate contention with the persons under whose protection she was
  placed; and, as her compliance was unhesitating, she had no experience of a
  severe and rigorous treatment. As Mr. Tyrrel's objection to the very name of
  Falkland became more palpable and uniform, Miss Melville increased in her
  precaution. She would stop herself in the half-pronounced sentences that
  were meant to his praise. This circumstance had necessarily an ungracious
  effect; it was a cutting satire upon the imbecility of her kinsman. Upon
  these occasions she would sometimes venture upon a good-humoured
  expostulation:—"Dear sir! well, I wonder how you can be so
  ill-natured! I am sure Mr. Falkland would do you any good office in the
  world:"—till she was checked by some gesture of impatience and
  fierceness.
At length she wholly conquered her heedlessness and inattention. But it
  was too late. Mr. Tyrrel already suspected the existence of that passion
  which she had thoughtlessly imbibed. His imagination, ingenious in torment,
  suggested to him all the different openings in conversation, in which she
  would have introduced the praise of Mr. Falkland, had she not been placed
  under this unnatural restraint. Her present reserve upon the subject was
  even more insufferable than her former loquacity. All his kindness for this
  unhappy orphan gradually subsided. Her partiality for the man who was the
  object of his unbounded abhorrence, appeared to him as the last persecution
  of a malicious destiny. He figured himself as about to be deserted by every
  creature in human form; all men, under the influence of a fatal enchantment,
  approving only what was sophisticated and artificial, and holding the rude
  and genuine offspring of nature in mortal antipathy. Impressed with these
  gloomy presages, he saw Miss Melville with no sentiments but those of
  rancorous aversion; and, accustomed as he was to the uncontrolled indulgence
  of his propensities, he determined to wreak upon her a signal revenge.

</div></body></text></TEI>