<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="2">CHAPTER II.
Among the favourite authors of his early years were the heroic poets of
  Italy. From them he imbibed the love of chivalry and romance. He had too
  much good sense to regret the times of Charlemagne and Arthur. But, while
  his imagination was purged by a certain infusion of philosophy, he conceived
  that there was in the manners depicted by these celebrated poets something
  to imitate, as well as something to avoid. He believed that nothing was so
  well calculated to make men delicate, gallant, and humane, as a temper
  perpetually alive to the sentiments of birth and honour. The opinions he
  entertained upon these topics were illustrated in his conduct, which was
  assiduously conformed to the model of heroism that his fancy suggested.
With these sentiments he set out upon his travels, at the age at which
  the grand tour is usually made; and they were rather confirmed than shaken
  by the adventures that befel him. By inclination he was led to make his
  longest stay in Italy; and here he fell into company with several young
  noblemen whose studies and principles were congenial to his own. By them he
  was assiduously courted, and treated with the most distinguished applause.
  They were delighted to meet with a foreigner, who had imbibed all the
  peculiarities of the most liberal and honourable among themselves. Nor was
  he less favoured and admired by the softer sex. Though his stature was
  small, his person had an air of uncommon dignity. His dignity was then
  heightened by certain additions which were afterwards obliterated,—an
  expression of frankness, ingenuity, and unreserve, and a spirit of the most
  ardent enthusiasm. Perhaps no Englishman was ever in an equal degree
  idolised by the inhabitants of Italy.
It was not possible for him to have drunk so deeply of the fountain of
  chivalry without being engaged occasionally in affairs of honour, all of
  which were terminated in a manner that would not have disgraced the
  chevalier Bayard himself. In Italy, the young men of rank divide themselves
  into two classes,—those who adhere to the pure principles of ancient
  gallantry, and those who, being actuated by the same acute sense of injury
  and insult, accustom themselves to the employment of hired bravoes as their
  instruments of vengeance. The whole difference, indeed, consists in the
  precarious application of a generally received distinction. The most
  generous Italian conceives that there are certain persons whom it would be
  contamination for him to call into the open field. He nevertheless believes
  that an indignity cannot be expiated but with blood, and is persuaded that
  the life of a man is a trifling consideration, in comparison of the
  indemnification to be made to his injured honour. There is, therefore,
  scarcely any Italian that would upon some occasions scruple assassination.
  Men of spirit among them, notwithstanding the prejudices of their education,
  cannot fail to have a secret conviction of its baseness, and will be
  desirous of extending as far as possible the cartel of honour. Real or
  affected arrogance teaches others to regard almost the whole species as
  their inferiors, and of consequence incites them to gratify their vengeance
  without danger to their persons. Mr. Falkland met with some of these. But
  his undaunted spirit and resolute temper gave him a decisive advantage even
  in such perilous rencounters. One instance, among many, of his manner of
  conducting himself among this proud and high-spirited people it may be
  proper to relate. Mr. Falkland is the principal agent in my history; and Mr.
  Falkland in the autumn and decay of his vigour, such as I found him, cannot
  be completely understood without a knowledge of his previous character, as
  it was in all the gloss of youth, yet unassailed by adversity, and unbroken
  in upon by anguish or remorse.
At Rome he was received with particular distinction at the house of
  marquis Pisani, who had an only daughter, the heir of his immense fortune,
  and the admiration of all the young nobility of that metropolis. Lady
  Lucretia Pisani was tall, of a dignified form, and uncommonly beautiful. She
  was not deficient in amiable qualities, but her soul was haughty, and her
  carriage not unfrequently contemptuous. Her pride was nourished by the
  consciousness of her charms, by her elevated rank, and the universal
  adoration she was accustomed to receive.
Among her numerous lovers count Malvesi was the individual most favoured
  by her father, nor did his addresses seem indifferent to her. The count was
  a man of considerable accomplishments, and of great integrity and
  benevolence of disposition. But he was too ardent a lover, to be able always
  to preserve the affability of his temper. The admirers whose addresses were
  a source of gratification to his mistress, were a perpetual uneasiness to
  him. Placing his whole happiness in the possession of this imperious beauty,
  the most trifling circumstances were capable of alarming him for the
  security of his pretensions. But most of all he was jealous of the English
  cavalier. Marquis Pisani, who had spent many years in France, was by no
  means partial to the suspicious precautions of Italian fathers, and indulged
  his daughter in considerable freedoms. His house and his daughter, within
  certain judicious restraints, were open to the resort of male visitants.
  But, above all, Mr. Falkland, as a foreigner, and a person little likely to
  form pretensions to the hand of Lucretia, was received upon a footing of
  great familiarity. The lady herself, conscious of innocence, entertained no
  scruple about trifles, and acted with the confidence and frankness of one
  who is superior to suspicion.
Mr. Falkland, after a residence of several weeks at Rome, proceeded to
  Naples. Meanwhile certain incidents occurred that delayed the intended
  nuptials of the heiress of Pisani. When he returned to Rome Count Malvesi
  was absent. Lady Lucretia, who had been considerably amused before with the
  conversation of Mr. Falkland, and who had an active and enquiring mind, had
  conceived, in the interval between his first and second residence at Rome, a
  desire to be acquainted with the English language, inspired by the lively
  and ardent encomiums of our best authors that she had heard from their
  countryman. She had provided herself with the usual materials for that
  purpose, and had made some progress during his absence. But upon his return
  she was forward to make use of the opportunity, which, if missed, might
  never occur again with equal advantage, of reading select passages of our
  poets with an Englishman of uncommon taste and capacity.
This proposal necessarily led to a more frequent intercourse. When Count
  Malvesi returned, he found Mr. Falkland established almost as an inmate of
  the Pisani palace. His mind could not fail to be struck with the
  criticalness of the situation. He was perhaps secretly conscious that the
  qualifications of the Englishman were superior to his own; and he trembled
  for the progress that each party might have made in the affection of the
  other, even before they were aware of the danger. He believed that the match
  was in every respect such as to flatter the ambition of Mr. Falkland; and he
  was stung even to madness by the idea of being deprived of the object
  dearest to his heart by this tramontane upstart.
He had, however, sufficient discretion first to demand an explanation of
  Lady Lucretia. She, in the gaiety of her heart, trifled with his anxiety.
  His patience was already exhausted, and he proceeded in his expostulation,
  in language that she was by no means prepared to endure with apathy. Lady
  Lucretia had always been accustomed to deference and submission; and, having
  got over something like terror, that was at first inspired by the imperious
  manner in which she was now catechised, her next feeling was that of the
  warmest resentment. She disdained to satisfy so insolent a questioner, and
  even indulged herself in certain oblique hints calculated to strengthen his
  suspicions. For some time she described his folly and presumption in terms
  of the most ludicrous sarcasm, and then, suddenly changing her style, bid
  him never let her see him more except upon the footing of the most distant
  acquaintance, as she was determined never again to subject herself to so
  unworthy a treatment. She was happy that he had at length disclosed to her
  his true character, and would know how to profit of her present experience
  to avoid a repetition of the same danger. All this passed in the full career
  of passion on both sides, and Lady Lucretia had no time to reflect upon what
  might be the consequence of thus exasperating her lover.
Count Malvesi left her in all the torments of frenzy. He believed that
  this was a premeditated scene, to find a pretence for breaking off an
  engagement that was already all but concluded; or, rather, his mind was
  racked with a thousand conjectures: he alternately thought that the
  injustice might be hers or his own; and he quarrelled with Lady Lucretia,
  himself, and the whole world. In this temper he hastened to the hotel of the
  English cavalier. The season of expostulation was now over, and he found
  himself irresistibly impelled to justify his precipitation with the lady, by
  taking for granted that the subject of his suspicion was beyond the reach of
  doubt.
Mr. Falkland was at home. The first words of the count were an abrupt
  accusation of duplicity in the affair of Lady Lucretia, and a challenge. The
  Englishman had an unaffected esteem for Malvesi, who was in reality a man of
  considerable merit, and who had been one of Mr. Falkland's earliest Italian
  acquaintance, they having originally met at Milan. But more than this, the
  possible consequence of a duel in the present instance burst upon his mind.
  He had the warmest admiration for Lady Lucretia, though his feelings were
  not those of a lover; and he knew that, however her haughtiness might
  endeavour to disguise it, she was impressed with a tender regard for Count
  Malvesi. He could not bear to think that any misconduct of his should
  interrupt the prospects of so deserving a pair. Guided by these sentiments,
  he endeavoured to expostulate with the Italian. But his attempts were
  ineffectual. His antagonist was drunk with choler, and would not listen to a
  word that tended to check the impetuosity of his thoughts. He traversed the
  room with perturbed steps, and even foamed with anguish and fury. Mr.
  Falkland, finding that all was to no purpose, told the count, that, if he
  would return to-morrow at the same hour, he would attend him to any scene of
  action he should think proper to select.
From Count Malvesi Mr. Falkland immediately proceeded to the palace of
  Pisani. Here he found considerable difficulty in appeasing the indignation
  of Lady Lucretia. His ideas of honour would by no means allow him to win her
  to his purpose by disclosing the cartel he had received; otherwise that
  disclosure would immediately have operated as the strongest motive that
  could have been offered to this disdainful beauty. But, though she dreaded
  such an event, the vague apprehension was not strong enough to induce her
  instantly to surrender all the stateliness of her resentment. Mr. Falkland,
  however, drew so interesting a picture of the disturbance of Count Malvesi's
  mind, and accounted in so flattering a manner for the abruptness of his
  conduct, that this, together with the arguments he adduced, completed the
  conquest of Lady Lucretia's resentment. Having thus far accomplished his
  purpose, he proceeded to disclose to her every thing that had passed.
The next day Count Malvesi appeared, punctual to his appointment, at Mr.
  Falkland's hotel. Mr. Falkland came to the door to receive him, but
  requested him to enter the house for a moment, as he had still an affair of
  three minutes to despatch. They proceeded to a parlour. Here Mr. Falkland
  left him, and presently returned leading in Lady Lucretia herself, adorned
  in all her charms, and those charms heightened upon the present occasion by
  a consciousness of the spirited and generous condescension she was exerting.
  Mr. Falkland led her up to the astonished count; and she, gently laying her
  hand upon the arm of her lover, exclaimed with the most attractive grace,
  "Will you allow me to retract the precipitate haughtiness into which I was
  betrayed?" The enraptured count, scarcely able to believe his senses, threw
  himself upon his knees before her, and stammered out his reply, signifying
  that the precipitation had been all his own, that he only had any
  forgiveness to demand, and, though they might pardon, he could never pardon
  himself for the sacrilege he had committed against her and this god-like
  Englishman. As soon as the first tumults of his joy had subsided, Mr.
  Falkland addressed him thus:—
"Count Malvesi, I feel the utmost pleasure in having thus by peaceful
  means disarmed your resentment, and effected your happiness. But I must
  confess, you put me to a severe trial. My temper is not less impetuous and
  fiery than your own, and it is not at all times that I should have been thus
  able to subdue it. But I considered that in reality the original blame was
  mine. Though your suspicion was groundless, it was not absurd. We have been
  trifling too much in the face of danger. I ought not, under the present
  weakness of our nature and forms of society, to have been so assiduous in my
  attendance upon this enchanting woman. It would have been little wonder, if,
  having so many opportunities, and playing the preceptor with her as I have
  done, I had been entangled before I was aware, and harboured a wish which I
  might not afterwards have had courage to subdue. I owed you an atonement for
  this imprudence.
"But the laws of honour are in the utmost degree rigid; and there was
  reason to fear that, however anxious I were to be your friend, I might be
  obliged to be your murderer. Fortunately, the reputation of my courage is
  sufficiently established, not to expose it to any impeachment by my
  declining your present defiance. It was lucky, however, that in our
  interview of yesterday you found me alone, and that accident by that means
  threw the management of the affair into my disposal. If the transaction
  should become known, the conclusion will now become known along with the
  provocation, and I am satisfied. But if the challenge had been public, the
  proofs I had formerly given of courage would not have excused my present
  moderation; and, though desirous to have avoided the combat, it would not
  have been in my power. Let us hence each of us learn to avoid haste and
  indiscretion, the consequences of which may be inexpiable but with blood;
  and may Heaven bless you in a consort of whom I deem you every way
  worthy!"
I have already said that this was by no means the only instance, in the
  course of his travels, in which Mr. Falkland acquitted himself in the most
  brilliant manner as a man of gallantry and virtue. He continued abroad
  during several years, every one of which brought some fresh accession to the
  estimation in which he was held, as well as to his own impatience of stain
  or dishonour. At length he thought proper to return to England, with the
  intention of spending the rest of his days at the residence of his
  ancestors.

</div></body></text></TEI>