<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="42">CHAPTER XIV.
I hasten to the conclusion of my melancholy story. I began to write soon
  after the period to which I have now conducted it. This was another resource
  that my mind, ever eager in inventing means to escape from my misery,
  suggested. In my haste to withdraw myself from the retreat in Wales, where
  first the certainty of Mr. Falkland's menaces was confirmed to me, I left
  behind me the apparatus of my etymological enquiries, and the papers I had
  written upon the subject. I have never been able to persuade myself to
  resume this pursuit. It is always discouraging, to begin over again a
  laborious task, and exert one's self to recover a position we had already
  occupied. I knew not how soon or how abruptly I might be driven from any new
  situation; the appendages of the study in which I had engaged were too
  cumbrous for this state of dependence and uncertainty; they only served to
  give new sharpness to the enmity of my foe, and new poignancy to my
  hourly-renewing distress.
But what was of greatest importance, and made the deepest impression upon
  my mind, was my separation from the family of Laura. Fool that I was, to
  imagine that there was any room for me in the abodes of friendship and
  tranquillity! It was now first, that I felt, with the most intolerable
  acuteness, how completely I was cut off from the whole human species. Other
  connections I had gained, comparatively without interest; and I saw them
  dissolved without the consummation of agony. I had never experienced the
  purest refinements of friendship, but in two instances, that of Collins, and
  this of the family of Laura. Solitude, separation, banishment! These are
  words often in the mouths of human beings; but few men except myself have
  felt the full latitude of their meaning. The pride of philosophy has taught
  us to treat man as an individual. He is no such thing. He holds necessarily,
  indispensably, to his species. He is like those twin-births, that have two
  heads indeed, and four hands; but, if you attempt to detach them from each
  other, they are inevitably subjected to miserable and lingering
  destruction.
It was this circumstance, more than all the rest, that gradually gorged
  my heart with abhorrence of Mr. Falkland. I could not think of his name but
  with a sickness and a loathing that seemed more than human. It was by his
  means that I suffered the loss of one consolation after another, of every
  thing that was happiness, or that had the resemblance of happiness.
The writing of these memoirs served me as a source of avocation for
  several years. For some time I had a melancholy satisfaction in it. I was
  better pleased to retrace the particulars of calamities that had formerly
  afflicted me, than to look forward, as at other times I was too apt to do,
  to those by which I might hereafter be overtaken. I conceived that my story,
  faithfully digested, would carry in it an impression of truth that few men
  would be able to resist; or, at worst, that, by leaving it behind me when I
  should no longer continue to exist, posterity might be induced to do me
  justice; and, seeing in my example what sort of evils are entailed upon
  mankind by society as it is at present constituted, might be inclined to
  turn their attention upon the fountain from which such bitter waters have
  been accustomed to flow. But these motives have diminished in their
  influence. I have contracted a disgust for life and all its appendages.
  Writing, which was at first a pleasure, is changed into a burthen. I shall
  compress into a small compass what remains to be told.
I discovered, not long after the period of which I am speaking, the
  precise cause of the reverse I had experienced in my residence in Wales,
  and, included in that cause, what it was I had to look for in my future
  adventures. Mr. Falkland had taken the infernal Gines into his pay, a man
  critically qualified for the service in which he was now engaged, by the
  unfeeling brutality of his temper, by his habits of mind at once audacious
  and artful, and by the peculiar animosity and vengeance he had conceived
  against me. The employment to which this man was hired, was that of
  following me from place to place, blasting my reputation, and preventing me
  from the chance, by continuing long in one residence, of acquiring a
  character for integrity, that should give new weight to any accusation I
  might at a future time be induced to prefer. He had come to the seat of my
  residence with the bricklayers and labourers I have mentioned; and, while he
  took care to keep out of sight so far as related to me, was industrious in
  disseminating that which, in the eye of the world, seemed to amount to a
  demonstration of the profligacy and detestableness of my character. It was
  no doubt from him that the detested scroll had been procured, which I had
  found in my habitation immediately prior to my quitting it. In all this Mr.
  Falkland, reasoning upon his principles, was only employing a necessary
  precaution. There was something in the temper of his mind, that impressed
  him with aversion to the idea of violently putting an end to my existence;
  at the same time that unfortunately he could never deem himself sufficiently
  secured against my recrimination, so long as I remained alive. As to the
  fact of Gines being retained by him for this tremendous purpose, he by no
  means desired that it should become generally known; but neither did he look
  upon the possibility of its being known with terror. It was already too
  notorious for his wishes, that I had advanced the most odious charges
  against him. If he regarded me with abhorrence as the adversary of his fame,
  those persons who had had occasion to be in any degree acquainted with our
  history, did not entertain less abhorrence against me for my own sake. If
  they should at any time know the pains he exerted in causing my evil
  reputation to follow me, they would consider it as an act of impartial
  justice, perhaps as a generous anxiety to prevent other men from being
  imposed upon and injured, as he had been.
What expedient was I to employ for the purpose of counteracting the
  meditated and barbarous prudence, which was thus destined, in all changes of
  scene, to deprive me of the benefits and consolations of human society?
  There was one expedient against which I was absolutely
  determined—disguise. I had experienced so many mortifications, and
  such intolerable restraint, when I formerly had recourse to it; it was
  associated in my memory with sensations of such acute anguish, that my mind
  was thus far entirely convinced: life was not worth purchasing at so high a
  price! But, though in this respect I was wholly resolved, there was another
  point that did not appear so material, and in which therefore I was willing
  to accommodate myself to circumstances. I was contented, if that would
  insure my peace, to submit to the otherwise unmanly expedient of passing by
  a different name.
But the change of my name, the abruptness with which I removed from place
  to place, the remoteness and the obscurity which I proposed to myself in the
  choice of my abode, were all insufficient to elude the sagacity of Gines, or
  the unrelenting constancy with which Mr. Falkland incited my tormentor to
  pursue me. Whithersoever I removed myself it was not long before I had
  occasion to perceive this detested adversary in my rear. No words can enable
  me to do justice to the sensations which this circumstance produced in me.
  It was like what has been described of the eye of Omniscience, pursuing the
  guilty sinner, and darting a ray that awakens him to new sensibility, at the
  very moment that, otherwise, exhausted nature would lull him into a
  temporary oblivion of the reproaches of his conscience. Sleep fled from my
  eyes. No walls could hide me from the discernment of this hated foe. Every
  where his industry was unwearied to create for me new distress. Rest I had
  none; relief I had none: never could I count upon an instant's security;
  never could I wrap myself in the shroud of oblivion. The minutes in which I
  did not actually perceive him, were contaminated and blasted with the
  certain expectation of his speedy interference. In my first retreat I had
  passed a few weeks of delusive tranquillity, but never after was I happy
  enough to attain to so much as that shadowy gratification. I spent some
  years in this dreadful vicissitude of pain. My sensations at certain periods
  amounted to insanity.
I pursued in every succeeding instance the conduct I had adopted at
  first. I determined never to enter into a contest of accusation and defence
  with the execrable Gines. If I could have submitted to it in other respects,
  what purpose would it answer? I should have but an imperfect and mutilated
  story to tell. This story had succeeded with persons already prepossessed in
  my favour by personal intercourse; but could it succeed with strangers? It
  had succeeded so long as I was able to hide myself from my pursuers; but
  could it succeed now, that this appeared impracticable, and that they
  proceeded by arming against me a whole vicinity at once?
It is inconceivable the mischiefs that this kind of existence included.
  Why should I insist upon such aggravations as hunger, beggary, and external
  wretchedness? These were an inevitable consequence. It was by the desertion
  of mankind that, in each successive instance, I was made acquainted with my
  fate. Delay in such a moment served but to increase the evil; and when I
  fled, meagreness and penury were the ordinary attendants of my course. But
  this was a small consideration. Indignation at one time, and unconquerable
  perseverance at another, sustained me, where humanity, left to itself, would
  probably have sunk.
It has already appeared that I was not of a temper to endure calamity,
  without endeavouring, by every means I could devise, to elude and disarm it.
  Recollecting, as I was habituated to do, the various projects by which my
  situation could be meliorated, the question occurred to me, "Why should I be
  harassed by the pursuits of this Gines? Why, man to man, may I not, by the
  powers of my mind, attain the ascendancy over him? At present he appears to
  be the persecutor, and I the persecuted: is not this difference the mere
  creature of the imagination? May I not employ my ingenuity to vex him with
  difficulties, and laugh at the endless labour to which he will be
  condemned?"
Alas, this is a speculation for a mind at ease! It is not the
  persecution, but the catastrophe which is annexed to it, that makes the
  difference between the tyrant and the sufferer! In mere corporal exertion
  the hunter perhaps is upon a level with the miserable animal he pursues! But
  could it be forgotten by either of us, that at every stage Gines was to
  gratify his malignant passions, by disseminating charges of the most
  infamous nature, and exciting against me the abhorrence of every honest
  bosom, while I was to sustain the still-repeated annihilation of my peace,
  my character, and my bread? Could I, by any refinement of reason, convert
  this dreadful series into sport? I had no philosophy that qualified me for
  so extraordinary an effort. If, under other circumstances, I could even have
  entertained so strange an imagination, I was restrained in the present
  instance by the necessity of providing for myself the means of subsistence,
  and the fetters which, through that necessity, the forms of human society
  imposed upon my exertions.
In one of those changes of residence, to which my miserable fate
  repeatedly compelled me, I met, upon a road which I was obliged to traverse,
  the friend of my youth, my earliest and best beloved friend, the venerable
  Collins. It was one of those misfortunes which served to accumulate my
  distress, that this man had quitted the island of Great Britain only a very
  few weeks before that fatal reverse of fortune which had ever since pursued
  me with unrelenting eagerness. Mr. Falkland, in addition to the large estate
  he possessed in England, had a very valuable plantation in the West Indies.
  This property had been greatly mismanaged by the person who had the
  direction of it on the spot; and, after various promises and evasions on his
  part, which, however they might serve to beguile the patience of Mr.
  Falkland, had been attended with no salutary fruits, it was resolved that
  Mr. Collins should go over in person, to rectify the abuses which had so
  long prevailed. There had even been some idea of his residing several years,
  if not settling finally, upon the plantation. From that hour to the present
  I had never received the smallest intelligence respecting him.
I had always considered the circumstance of his critical absence as one
  of my severest misfortunes. Mr. Collins had been one of the first persons,
  even in the period of my infancy, to conceive hopes of me, as of something
  above the common standard; and had contributed more than any other to
  encourage and assist my juvenile studies. He had been the executor of the
  little property of my father, who had fixed upon him for that purpose in
  consideration of the mutual affection that existed between us; and I seemed,
  on every account, to have more claim upon his protection than upon that of
  any other human being. I had always believed that, had he been present in
  the crisis of my fortune, he would have felt a conviction of my innocence;
  and, convinced himself, would, by means of the venerableness and energy of
  his character, have interposed so effectually, as to have saved me the
  greater part of my subsequent misfortunes.
There was yet another idea in my mind relative to this subject, which had
  more weight with me, than even the substantial exertions of friendship I
  should have expected from him. The greatest aggravation of my present lot
  was, that I was cut off from the friendship of mankind. I can safely affirm,
  that poverty and hunger, that endless wanderings, that a blasted character
  and the curses that clung to my name, were all of them slight misfortunes
  compared to this. I endeavoured to sustain myself by the sense of my
  integrity, but the voice of no man upon earth echoed to the voice of my
  conscience. "I called aloud; but there was none to answer; there was none
  that regarded." To me the whole world was unhearing as the tempest, and as
  cold as the torpedo. Sympathy, the magnetic virtue, the hidden essence of
  our life, was extinct. Nor was this the sum of my misery. This food, so
  essential to an intelligent existence, seemed perpetually renewing before me
  in its fairest colours, only the more effectually to elude my grasp, and to
  mock my hunger. From time to time I was prompted to unfold the affections of
  my soul, only to be repelled with the greater anguish, and to be baffled in
  a way the most intolerably mortifying.
No sight therefore could give me a purer delight than that which now
  presented itself to my eyes. It was some time however, before either of us
  recognised the person of the other. Ten years had elapsed since our last
  interview. Mr. Collins looked much older than he had done at that period; in
  addition to which, he was, in his present appearance, pale, sickly, and
  thin. These unfavourable effects had been produced by the change of climate,
  particularly trying to persons in an advanced period of life. Add to which,
  I supposed him to be at that moment in the West Indies. I was probably as
  much altered in the period that had elapsed as he had been. I was the first
  to recollect him. He was on horseback; I on foot. I had suffered him to pass
  me. In a moment the full idea of who he was rushed upon my mind; I ran; I
  called with an impetuous voice; I was unable to restrain the vehemence of my
  emotions.
The ardour of my feelings disguised my usual tone of speaking, which
  otherwise Mr. Collins would infallibly have recognised. His sight was
  already dim; he pulled up his horse till I should overtake him; and then
  said, "Who are you? I do not know you."
"My father!" exclaimed I, embracing one of his knees with fervour and
  delight, "I am your son; once your little Caleb, whom you a thousand times
  loaded with your kindness!"
The unexpected repetition of my name gave a kind of shuddering emotion to
  my friend, which was however checked by his age, and the calm and benevolent
  philosophy that formed one of his most conspicuous habits.
"I did not expect to see you!" replied he: "I did not wish it!"
"My best, my oldest friend!" answered I, respect blending itself with my
  impatience, "do not say so! I have not a friend any where in the whole world
  but you! In you at least let me find sympathy and reciprocal affection! If
  you knew how anxiously I have thought of you during the whole period of your
  absence, you would not thus grievously disappoint me in your return!"
"How is it," said Mr. Collins, gravely, "that you have been reduced to
  this forlorn condition? Was it not the inevitable consequence of your own
  actions?"
"The actions of others, not mine! Does not your heart tell you that I am
  innocent?"
"No. My observation of your early character taught me that you would be
  extraordinary; but, unhappily, all extraordinary men are not good men: that
  seems to be a lottery, dependent on circumstances apparently the most
  trivial."
"Will you hear my justification? I am as sure as I am of my existence,
  that I can convince you of my purity."
"Certainly, if you require it, I will hear you. But that must not be just
  now. I could have been glad to decline it wholly. At my age I am not fit for
  the storm; and I am not so sanguine as you in my expectation of the result.
  Of what would you convince me? That Mr. Falkland is a suborner and
  murderer?"
I made no answer. My silence was an affirmative to the question.
"And what benefit will result from this conviction? I have known you a
  promising boy, whose character might turn to one side or the other as events
  should decide. I have known Mr. Falkland in his maturer years, and have
  always admired him, as the living model of liberality and goodness. If you
  could change all my ideas, and show me that there was no criterion by which
  vice might be prevented from being mistaken for virtue, what benefit would
  arise from that? I must part with all my interior consolation, and all my
  external connections. And for what? What is it you propose? The death of Mr.
  Falkland by the hands of the hangman."
"No; I will not hurt a hair of his head, unless compelled to it by a
  principle of defence. But surely you owe me justice?"
"What justice? The justice of proclaiming your innocence? You know what
  consequences are annexed to that. But I do not believe I shall find you
  innocent. If you even succeed in perplexing my understanding, you will not
  succeed in enlightening it. Such is the state of mankind, that innocence,
  when involved in circumstances of suspicion, can scarcely ever make out a
  demonstration of its purity; and guilt can often make us feel an
  insurmountable reluctance to the pronouncing it guilt. Meanwhile, for the
  purchase of this uncertainty, I must sacrifice all the remaining comforts of
  my life. I believe Mr. Falkland to be virtuous; but I know him to be
  prejudiced. He would never forgive me even this accidental parley, if by any
  means he should come to be acquainted with it."
"Oh, argue not the consequences that are possible to result!" answered I,
  impatiently, "I have a right to your kindness; I have a right to your
  assistance!"
"You have them. You have them to a certain degree; and it is not likely
  that, by any process of examination, you can have them entire. You know my
  habits of thinking. I regard you as vicious; but I do not consider the
  vicious as proper objects of indignation and scorn. I consider you as a
  machine; you are not constituted, I am afraid, to be greatly useful to your
  fellow men: but you did not make yourself; you are just what circumstances
  irresistibly compelled you to be. I am sorry for your ill properties; but I
  entertain no enmity against you, nothing but benevolence. Considering you in
  the light in which I at present consider you, I am ready to contribute every
  thing in my power to your real advantage, and would gladly assist you, if I
  knew how, in detecting and extirpating the errors that have misled you. You
  have disappointed me, but I have no reproaches to utter: it is more
  necessary for me to feel compassion for you, than that I should accumulate
  your misfortune by my censures."
What could I say to such a man as this? Amiable, incomparable man! Never
  was my mind more painfully divided than at that moment. The more he excited
  my admiration, the more imperiously did my heart command me, whatever were
  the price it should cost, to extort his friendship. I was persuaded that
  severe duty required of him, that he should reject all personal
  considerations, that he should proceed resolutely to the investigation of
  the truth, and that, if he found the result terminating in my favour, he
  should resign all his advantages, and, deserted as I was by the world, make
  a common cause, and endeavour to compensate the general injustice. But was
  it for me to force this conduct upon him, if, now in his declining years,
  his own fortitude shrank from it? Alas, neither he nor I foresaw the
  dreadful catastrophe that was so closely impending! Otherwise, I am well
  assured that no tenderness for his remaining tranquillity would have
  withheld him from a compliance with my wishes! On the other hand, could I
  pretend to know what evils might result to him from his declaring himself my
  advocate? Might not his integrity be browbeaten and defeated, as mine had
  been? Did the imbecility of his grey hairs afford no advantage to my
  terrible adversary in the contest? Might not Mr. Falkland reduce him to a
  condition as wretched and low as mine? After all, was it not vice in me to
  desire to involve another man in my sufferings? If I regarded them as
  intolerable, this was still an additional reason why I should bear them
  alone.
Influenced by these considerations, I assented to his views. I assented
  to be thought hardly of by the man in the world whose esteem I most ardently
  desired, rather than involve him in possible calamity. I assented to the
  resigning what appeared to me at that moment as the last practicable comfort
  of my life; a comfort, upon the thought of which, while I surrendered it, my
  mind dwelt with undescribable longings. Mr. Collins was deeply affected with
  the apparent ingenuousness with which I expressed my feelings. The secret
  struggle of his mind was, "Can this be hypocrisy? The individual with whom I
  am conferring, if virtuous, is one of the most disinterestedly virtuous
  persons in the world." We tore ourselves from each other. Mr. Collins
  promised, as far as he was able, to have an eye upon my vicissitudes, and to
  assist me, in every respect that was consistent with a just recollection of
  consequences. Thus I parted as it were with the last expiring hope of my
  mind; and voluntarily consented, thus maimed and forlorn, to encounter all
  the evils that were yet in store for me.
This is the latest event which at present I think it necessary to record.
  I shall doubtless hereafter have further occasion to take up the pen. Great
  and unprecedented as my sufferings have been, I feel intimately persuaded
  that there are worse sufferings that await me. What mysterious cause is it
  that enables me to write this, and not to perish under the horrible
  apprehension!

</div></body></text></TEI>