<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="41">CHAPTER XIII.
Influenced by these reasonings, I determined to retain what had thus been
  put into my hands. My next care was in regard to the scene I should choose,
  as the retreat of that life which I had just saved from the grasp of the
  executioner. The danger to which I was exposed of forcible interruption in
  my pursuits, was probably, in some respects, less now than it had been
  previously to this crisis. Besides, that I was considerably influenced in
  this deliberation by the strong loathing I conceived for the situations in
  which I had lately been engaged. I knew not in what mode Mr. Falkland
  intended to exercise his vengeance against me; but I was seized with so
  unconquerable an aversion to disguise, and the idea of spending my life in
  personating a fictitious character, that I could not, for the present at
  least, reconcile my mind to any thing of that nature. The same kind of
  disgust I had conceived for the metropolis, where I had spent so many hours
  of artifice, sadness, and terror. I therefore decided in favour of the
  project which had formerly proved amusing to my imagination, of withdrawing
  to some distant, rural scene, a scene of calmness and obscurity, where for a
  few years at least, perhaps during the life of Mr. Falkland, I might be
  hidden from the world, recover the wounds my mind had received in this fatal
  connection, methodise and improve the experience which had been accumulated,
  cultivate the faculties I in any degree possessed, and employ the intervals
  of these occupations in simple industry, and the intercourse of guileless,
  uneducated, kind-intentioned minds. The menaces of my persecutor seemed to
  forebode the inevitable interruption of this system. But I deemed it wise to
  put these menaces out of my consideration I compared them to death, which
  must infallibly overtake us we know not when; but the possibility of whose
  arrival next year, next week, to-morrow, must be left out of the calculation
  of him who would enter upon any important or well-concerted undertaking.
Such were the ideas that determined my choice. Thus did my youthful mind
  delineate the system of distant years, even when the threats of instant
  calamity still sounded in my ears. I was inured to the apprehension of
  mischief, till at last the hoarse roarings of the beginning tempest had lost
  their power of annihilating my peace. I however thought it necessary, while
  I was most palpably within the sphere of the enemy, to exert every
  practicable degree of vigilance. I was careful not to incur the hazards of
  darkness and solitude. When I left the town it was with the stage-coach, an
  obvious source of protection against glaring and enormous violence.
  Meanwhile I found myself no more exposed to molestation in my progress, than
  the man in the world who should have had the least reason for apprehensions
  of this nature. As the distance increased, I relaxed something in my
  precaution, though still awake to a sense of danger, and constantly pursued
  with the image of my foe. I fixed upon an obscure market-town in Wales as
  the chosen seat of my operations. This place recommended itself to my
  observation as I was wandering in quest of an abode. It was clean, cheerful,
  and of great simplicity of appearance. It was at a distance from any public
  and frequented road, and had nothing which could deserve the name of trade.
  The face of nature around it was agreeably diversified, being partly wild
  and romantic, and partly rich and abundant in production.
Here I solicited employment in two professions; the first, that of a
  watchmaker, in which though the instructions I had received were few, they
  were eked out and assisted by a mind fruitful in mechanical invention; the
  other, that of an instructor in mathematics and its practical application,
  geography, astronomy, land-surveying, and navigation. Neither of these was a
  very copious source of emolument in the obscure retreat I had chosen for
  myself; but, if my receipts were slender, my disbursements were still fewer.
  In this little town I became acquainted with the vicar, the apothecary, the
  lawyer, and the rest of the persons who, time out of mind, had been regarded
  as the top gentry of the place. Each of these centred in himself a variety
  of occupations. There was little in the appearance of the vicar that
  reminded you of his profession, except on the recurring Sunday. At other
  times he condescended, with his evangelical hand to guide the plough, or to
  drive the cows from the field to the farm-yard for the milking. The
  apothecary occasionally officiated as a barber, and the lawyer was the
  village schoolmaster.
By all these persons I was received with kindness and hospitality. Among
  people thus remote from the bustle of human life there is an open spirit of
  confidence, by means of which a stranger easily finds access to their
  benevolence and good-will. My manners had never been greatly debauched from
  the simplicity of rural life by the scenes through which I had passed; and
  the hardships I had endured had given additional mildness to my character.
  In the theatre upon which I was now placed I had no rival. My mechanical
  occupation had hitherto been a non-resident; and the schoolmaster, who did
  not aspire to the sublime heights of science I professed to communicate, was
  willing to admit me as a partner in the task of civilising the unpolished
  manners of the inhabitants. For the parson, civilisation was no part of his
  trade; his business was with the things of a better life, not with the
  carnal concerns of this material scene; in truth, his thoughts were
  principally occupied with his oatmeal and his cows.
These however were not the only companions which this remote retirement
  afforded me. There was a family of a very different description, of which I
  gradually became the chosen intimate. The father was a shrewd, sensible,
  rational man, but who had turned his principal attention to subjects of
  agriculture. His wife was a truly admirable and extraordinary woman. She was
  the daughter of a Neapolitan nobleman, who, after having visited, and made a
  considerable figure, in every country in Europe, had at length received the
  blow of fate in this village. He had been banished his country upon
  suspicion of religious and political heresy, and his estates confiscated.
  With this only child, like Prospero in the Tempest, he had withdrawn himself
  to one of the most obscure and uncultivated regions of the world. Very soon
  however after his arrival in Wales he had been seized with a malignant
  fever, which carried him off in three days. He died possessed of no other
  property than a few jewels, and a bill of credit, to no considerable amount,
  upon an English banker.
Here then was the infant Laura, left in a foreign country, and without a
  single friend. The father of her present husband was led by motives of pure
  humanity to seek to mitigate the misfortunes of the dying Italian. Though a
  plain uninstructed man, with no extraordinary refinement of intellect, there
  was something in his countenance that determined the stranger in his present
  forlorn and melancholy situation, to make him his executor, and the guardian
  of his daughter. The Neapolitan understood enough of English to explain his
  wishes to this friendly attendant of his death-bed. As his circumstances
  were narrow, the servants of the stranger, two Italians, a male and a
  female, were sent back to their own country soon after the death of their
  master.
Laura was at this time eight years of age. At these tender years she had
  been susceptible of little direct instruction; and, as she grew up, even the
  memory of her father became, from year to year, more vague and indistinct in
  her mind. But there was something she derived from her father, whether along
  with the life he bestowed, or as the consequence of his instruction and
  manners, which no time could efface. Every added year of her life
  contributed to develop the fund of her accomplishments. She read, she
  observed, she reflected. Without instructors, she taught herself to draw, to
  sing, and to understand the more polite European languages. As she had no
  society in this remote situation but that of peasants, she had no idea of
  honour or superiority to be derived from her acquisitions; but pursued them
  from a secret taste, and as the sources of personal enjoyment.
A mutual attachment gradually arose between her and the only son of her
  guardian. His father led him, from early youth, to the labours and the
  sports of the field, and there was little congeniality between his pursuits
  and those of Laura. But this was a defect that she was slow to discover. She
  had never been accustomed to society in her chosen amusements, and habit at
  that time even made her conceive, that they were indebted to solitude for an
  additional relish. The youthful rustic had great integrity, great kindness
  of heart, and was a lad of excellent sense. He was florid,
  well-proportioned, and the goodness of his disposition made his manners
  amiable. Accomplishments greater than these she had never seen in human
  form, since the death of her father. In fact, she is scarcely to be
  considered as a sufferer in this instance; since, in her forlorn and
  destitute condition, it is little probable, when we consider the habits and
  notions that now prevail, that her accomplishments, unassisted by fortune,
  would have procured her an equal alliance in marriage.
When she became a mother her heart opened to a new affection. The idea
  now presented itself, which had never occurred before, that in her children
  at least she might find the partners and companions of her favourite
  employments. She was, at the time of my arrival, mother of four, the eldest
  of which was a son. To all of them she had been a most assiduous instructor.
  It was well for her perhaps that she obtained this sphere for the exercise
  of her mind. It came just at the period when the charm which human life
  derives from novelty is beginning to wear off. It gave her new activity and
  animation. It is perhaps impossible that the refinements of which human
  nature is capable should not, after a time, subside into sluggishness, if
  they be not aided by the influence of society and affection.
The son of the Welch farmer by this admirable woman was about seventeen
  years of age at the time of my settlement in their neighbourhood. His eldest
  sister was one year younger than himself. The whole family composed a group,
  with which a lover of tranquillity and virtue would have delighted to
  associate in any situation. It is easy therefore to conceive how much I
  rejoiced in their friendship, in this distant retirement, and suffering, as
  I felt myself, from the maltreatment and desertion of my species. The
  amiable Laura had a wonderful quickness of eye, and rapidity of
  apprehension; but this feature in her countenance was subdued by a sweetness
  of disposition, such as I never in any other instance saw expressed in the
  looks of a human being. She soon distinguished me by her kindness and
  friendship; for, living as she had done, though familiar with the written
  productions of a cultivated intellect, she had never seen the thing itself
  realised in a living being, except in the person of her father. She
  delighted to converse with me upon subjects of literature and taste, and she
  eagerly invited my assistance in the education of her children. The son,
  though young, had been so happily improved and instructed by his mother,
  that I found in him nearly all the most essential qualities we require in a
  friend. Engagement and inclination equally led me to pass a considerable
  part of every day in this agreeable society. Laura treated me as if I had
  been one of the family; and I sometimes flattered myself that I might one
  day become such in reality. What an enviable resting-place for me, who had
  known nothing but calamity, and had scarcely dared to look for sympathy and
  kindness in the countenance of a human being!
The sentiments of friendship which early disclosed themselves between me
  and the member of this amiable family daily became stronger. At every
  interview, the confidence reposed in me by the mother increased. While our
  familiarity gained in duration, it equally gained in that subtlety of
  communication by which it seemed to shoot forth its roots in every
  direction. There are a thousand little evanescent touches in the development
  of a growing friendship, that are neither thought of, nor would be
  understood, between common acquaintances. I honoured and esteemed the
  respectable Laura like a mother; for, though the difference of our ages was
  by no means sufficient to authorise the sentiment, it was irresistibly
  suggested to me by the fact of her always being presented to my observation
  under the maternal character. Her son was a lad of great understanding,
  generosity, and feeling, and of no contemptible acquirements; while his
  tender years, and the uncommon excellence of his mother, subtracted
  something from the independence of his judgment, and impressed him with a
  sort of religious deference for her will. In the eldest daughter I beheld
  the image of Laura; for that I felt attached to her for the present; and I
  sometimes conceived it probable that hereafter I might learn to love her for
  her own sake.—Alas, it was thus that I amused myself with the visions
  of distant years, while I stood in reality on the brink of the
  precipice!
It will perhaps be thought strange that I never once communicated the
  particulars of my story to this amiable matron, or to my young friend, for
  such I may also venture to call him, her son. But in truth I abhorred the
  memory of this story; I placed all my hopes of happiness in the prospect of
  its being consigned to oblivion. I fondly flattered myself that such would
  be the event: in the midst of my unlooked-for happiness, I scarcely
  recollected, or, recollecting, was disposed to yield but a small degree of
  credit to, the menaces of Mr. Falkland.
One day, that I was sitting alone with the accomplished Laura, she
  repeated his all-dreadful name. I started with astonishment, amazed that a
  woman like this, who knew nobody, who lived as it were alone in a corner of
  the universe, who had never in a single instance entered into any
  fashionable circle, this admirable and fascinating hermit, should, by some
  unaccountable accident, have become acquainted with this fatal and
  tremendous name. Astonishment however was not my only sensation. I became
  pale with terror; I rose from my seat; I attempted to sit down again; I
  reeled out of the room, and hastened to bury myself in solitude. The
  unexpectedness of the incident took from me all precaution, and overwhelmed
  my faculties. The penetrating Laura observed my behaviour; but nothing
  further occurred to excite her attention to it at that time; and, concluding
  from my manner that enquiry would be painful to me, she humanely suppressed
  her curiosity.
I afterwards found that Mr. Falkland had been known to the father of
  Laura; that he had been acquainted with the story of Count Malvesi, and with
  a number of other transactions redounding in the highest degree to the
  credit of the gallant Englishman. The Neapolitan had left letters in which
  these transactions were recorded, and which spoke of Mr. Falkland in the
  highest terms of panegyric. Laura had been used to regard every little relic
  of her father with a sort of religious veneration; and, by this accident,
  the name of Mr. Falkland was connected in her mind with the sentiments of
  unbounded esteem.
The scene by which I was surrounded was perhaps more grateful to me, than
  it would have been to most other persons with my degree of intellectual
  cultivation. Sore with persecution and distress, and bleeding at almost
  every vein, there was nothing I so much coveted as rest and tranquillity. It
  seemed as if my faculties were, at least for the time, exhausted by the late
  preternatural intensity of their exertions, and that they stood
  indispensably in need of a period of comparative suspension.
This was however but a temporary feeling. My mind had always been active,
  and I was probably indebted to the sufferings I had endured, and the
  exquisite and increased susceptibility they produced, for new energies. I
  soon felt the desire of some additional and vigorous pursuit. In this state
  of mind, I met by accident, in a neglected corner of the house of one of my
  neighbours, with a general dictionary of four of the northern languages.
  This incident gave a direction to my thoughts. In my youth I had not been
  inattentive to languages. I determined to attempt, at least for my own use,
  an etymological analysis of the English language. I easily perceived, that
  this pursuit had one advantage to a person in my situation, and that a small
  number of books, consulted with this view, would afford employment for a
  considerable time. I procured other dictionaries. In my incidental reading,
  I noted the manner in which words were used, and applied these remarks to
  the illustration of my general enquiry. I was unintermitted in my assiduity,
  and my collections promised to accumulate. Thus I was provided with sources
  both of industry and recreation, the more completely to divert my thoughts
  from the recollection of my past misfortunes.
In this state, so grateful to my feelings, week after week glided away
  without interruption and alarm. The situation in which I was now placed had
  some resemblance to that in which I had spent my earlier years, with the
  advantage of a more attractive society, and a riper judgment. I began to
  look back upon the intervening period as upon a distempered and tormenting
  dream; or rather perhaps my feelings were like those of a man recovered from
  an interval of raging delirium, from ideas of horror, confusion, flight,
  persecution, agony, and despair! When I recollected what I had undergone, it
  was not without satisfaction, as the recollection of a thing that was past;
  every day augmented my hope that it was never to return. Surely the dark and
  terrific menaces of Mr. Falkland were rather the perturbed suggestions of
  his angry mind, than the final result of a deliberate and digested system!
  How happy should I feel, beyond the ordinary lot of man, if, after the
  terrors I had undergone, I should now find myself unexpectedly restored to
  the immunities of a human being!
While I was thus soothing my mind with fond imaginations, it happened
  that a few bricklayers and their labourers came over from a distance of five
  or six miles, to work upon some additions to one of the better sort of
  houses in the town, which had changed its tenant. No incident could be more
  trivial than this, had it not been for a strange coincidence of time between
  this circumstance, and a change which introduced itself into my situation.
  This first manifested itself in a sort of shyness with which I was treated,
  first by one person, and then another, of my new-formed acquaintance. They
  were backward to enter into conversation with me, and answered my enquiries
  with an awkward and embarrassed air. When they met me in the street or the
  field, their countenances contracted a cloud, and they endeavoured to shun
  me. My scholars quitted me one after another; and I had no longer any
  employment in my mechanical profession. It is impossible to describe the
  sensations, which the gradual but uninterrupted progress of this revolution
  produced in my mind. It seemed as if I had some contagious disease, from
  which every man shrunk with alarm, and left me to perish unassisted and
  alone. I asked one man and another to explain to me the meaning of these
  appearances; but every one avoided the task, and answered in an evasive and
  ambiguous manner. I sometimes supposed that it was all a delusion of the
  imagination; till the repetition of the sensation brought the reality too
  painfully home to my apprehension. There are few things that give a greater
  shock to the mind, than a phenomenon in the conduct of our fellow men, of
  great importance to our concerns, and for which we are unable to assign any
  plausible reason. At times I was half inclined to believe that the change
  was not in other men, but that some alienation of my own understanding
  generated the horrid vision. I endeavoured to awaken from my dream, and
  return to my former state of enjoyment and happiness; but in vain. To the
  same consideration it may be ascribed, that, unacquainted with the source of
  the evil, observing its perpetual increase, and finding it, so far as I
  could perceive, entirely arbitrary in its nature, I was unable to ascertain
  its limits, or the degree in which it would finally overwhelm me.
In the midst however of the wonderful and seemingly inexplicable nature
  of this scene, there was one idea that instantly obtruded itself, and that I
  could never after banish from my mind. It is Falkland! In vain I struggled
  against the seeming improbability of the supposition. In vain I said, "Mr.
  Falkland, wise as he is, and pregnant in resources, acts by human, not by
  supernatural means. He may overtake me by surprise, and in a manner of which
  I had no previous expectation; but he cannot produce a great and notorious
  effect without some visible agency, however difficult it may be to trace
  that agency to its absolute author. He cannot, like those invisible
  personages who are supposed from time to time to interfere in human affairs,
  ride in the whirlwind, shroud himself in clouds and impenetrable darkness,
  and scatter destruction upon the earth from his secret habitation." Thus it
  was that I bribed my imagination, and endeavoured to persuade myself that my
  present unhappiness originated in a different source from my former. All
  evils appeared trivial to me, in comparison with the recollection and
  perpetuation of my parent misfortune. I felt like a man distracted, by the
  incoherence of my ideas to my present situation, excluding from it the
  machinations of Mr. Falkland, on the one hand; and on the other, by the
  horror I conceived at the bare possibility of again encountering his
  animosity, after a suspension of many weeks, a suspension as I had hoped for
  ever. An interval like this was an age to a person in the calamitous
  situation I had so long experienced. But, in spite of my efforts, I could
  not banish from my mind the dreadful idea. My original conceptions of the
  genius and perseverance of Mr. Falkland had been such, that I could with
  difficulty think any thing impossible to him. I knew not how to set up my
  own opinions of material causes and the powers of the human mind, as the
  limits of existence. Mr. Falkland had always been to my imagination an
  object of wonder, and that which excites our wonder we scarcely suppose
  ourselves competent to analyse.
It may well be conceived, that one of the first persons to whom I thought
  of applying for an explanation of this dreadful mystery was the accomplished
  Laura. My disappointment here cut me to the heart. I was not prepared for
  it. I recollected the ingenuousness of her nature, the frankness of her
  manners, the partiality with which she had honoured me. If I were mortified
  with the coldness, the ruggedness, and the cruel mistake of principles with
  which the village inhabitants repelled my enquiries, the mortification I
  suffered, only drove me more impetuously to seek the cure of my griefs from
  this object of my admiration. "In Laura," said I, "I am secure from these
  vulgar prejudices. I confide in her justice. I am sure she will not cast me
  off unheard, nor without strictly examining a question on all sides, in
  which every thing that is valuable to a person she once esteemed, may be
  involved."
Thus encouraging myself, I turned my steps to the place of her residence.
  As I passed along I called up all my recollection, I summoned my faculties.
  "I may be made miserable," said I, "but it shall not be for want of any
  exertion of mine, that promises to lead to happiness. I will be clear,
  collected, simple in narrative, ingenuous in communication. I will leave
  nothing unsaid that the case may require. I will not volunteer any thing
  that relates to my former transactions with Mr. Falkland; but, if I find
  that my present calamity is connected with those transactions, I will not
  fear but that by an honest explanation I shall remove it."
I knocked at the door. A servant appeared, and told me that her mistress
  hoped I would excuse her; she must really beg to dispense with my visit.
I was thunderstruck. I was rooted to the spot. I had been carefully
  preparing my mind for every thing that I supposed likely to happen, but this
  event had not entered into my calculations. I roused myself in a partial
  degree, and walked away without uttering a word.
I had not gone far before I perceived one of the workmen following me,
  who put into my hands a billet. The contents were these:—
"MR. WILLIAMS,
"Let me see you no more. I have a right at least to expect your
  compliance with this requisition; and, upon that condition, I pardon the
  enormous impropriety and guilt with which you have conducted yourself to me
  and my family.
"LAURA DENISON."
The sensations with which I read these few lines are indescribable. I
  found in them a dreadful confirmation of the calamity that on all sides
  invaded me. But what I felt most was the unmoved coldness with which they
  appeared to be written. This coldness from Laura, my comforter, my friend,
  my mother! To dismiss, to cast me off for ever, without one thought of
  compunction!
I determined however, in spite of her requisition, and in spite of her
  coldness, to have an explanation with her. I did not despair of conquering
  the antipathy she harboured. I did not fear that I should rouse her from the
  vulgar and unworthy conception, of condemning a man, in points the most
  material to his happiness, without stating the accusations that are urged
  against him, and without hearing him in reply.
Though I had no doubt, by means of resolution, of gaining access to her
  in her house, yet I preferred taking her unprepared, and not warmed against
  me by any previous contention. Accordingly, the next morning, at the time
  she usually devoted to half an hour's air and exercise, I hastened to her
  garden, leaped the paling, and concealed myself in an arbour. Presently I
  saw, from my retreat, the younger part of the family strolling through the
  garden, and from thence into the fields; but it was not my business to be
  seen by them. I looked after them however with earnestness, unobserved; and
  I could not help asking myself, with a deep and heartfelt sigh, whether it
  were possible that I saw them now for the last time?
They had not advanced far into the fields, before their mother made her
  appearance. I observed in her her usual serenity and sweetness of
  countenance. I could feel my heart knocking against my ribs. My whole frame
  was in a tumult. I stole out of the arbour; and, as I advanced nearer, my
  pace became quickened.
"For God's sake, madam," exclaimed I, "give me a hearing! Do not avoid
  me!"
She stood still. "No, sir," she replied, "I shall not avoid you. I wished
  you to dispense with this meeting; but since I cannot obtain that—I am
  conscious of no wrong; and therefore, though the meeting gives me pain, it
  inspires me with no fear."
"Oh, madam," answered I, "my friend! the object of all my reverence! whom
  I once ventured to call my mother! can you wish not to hear me? Can you have
  no anxiety for my justification, whatever may be the unfavourable impression
  you may have received against me?"
"Not an atom. I have neither wish nor inclination to hear you. That tale
  which, in its plain and unadorned state, is destructive of the character of
  him to whom it relates, no colouring can make an honest one."
"Good God! Can you think of condemning a man when you have heard only one
  side of his story?"
"Indeed I can," replied she with dignity. "The maxim of hearing both
  sides may be very well in some cases; but it would be ridiculous to suppose
  that there are not cases, that, at the first mention, are too clear to admit
  the shadow of a doubt. By a well-concerted defence you may give me new
  reasons to admire your abilities; but I am acquainted with them already. I
  can admire your abilities, without tolerating your character."
"Madam! Amiable, exemplary Laura! whom, in the midst of all your
  harshness and inflexibility, I honour! I conjure you, by every thing that is
  sacred, to tell me what it is that has filled you with this sudden aversion
  to me."
"No, sir; that you shall never obtain from me. I have nothing to say to
  you. I stand still and hear you; because virtue disdains to appear abashed
  and confounded in the presence of vice. Your conduct even at this moment, in
  my opinion, condemns you. True virtue refuses the drudgery of explanation
  and apology. True virtue shines by its own light, and needs no art to set it
  off. You have the first principles of morality as yet to learn."
"And can you imagine, that the most upright conduct is always superior to
  the danger of ambiguity?"
"Exactly so. Virtue, sir, consists in actions, and not in words. The good
  man and the bad are characters precisely opposite, not characters
  distinguished from each other by imperceptible shades. The Providence that
  rules us all, has not permitted us to be left without a clew in the most
  important of all questions. Eloquence may seek to confound it; but it shall
  be my care to avoid its deceptive influence. I do not wish to have my
  understanding perverted, and all the differences of things concealed from my
  apprehension."
"Madam, madam! it would be impossible for you to hold this language, if
  you had not always lived in this obscure retreat, if you had ever been
  conversant with the passions and institutions of men."
"It may be so. And, if that be the case, I have great reason to be
  thankful to my God, who has thus enabled me to preserve the innocence of my
  heart, and the integrity of my understanding."
"Can you believe then that ignorance is the only, or the safest,
  preservative of integrity?"
"Sir, I told you at first, and I repeat to you again, that all your
  declamation is in vain. I wish you would have saved me and yourself that
  pain which is the only thing that can possibly result from it. But let us
  suppose that virtue could ever be the equivocal thing you would have me
  believe. Is it possible, if you had been honest, that you would not have
  acquainted me with your story? Is it possible, that you would have left me
  to have been informed of it by a mere accident, and with all the shocking
  aggravations you well knew that accident would give it? Is it possible you
  should have violated the most sacred of all trusts, and have led me
  unknowingly to admit to the intercourse of my children a character, which
  if, as you pretend, it is substantially honest, you cannot deny to be
  blasted and branded in the face of the whole world? Go, sir; I despise you.
  You are a monster and not a man. I cannot tell whether my personal situation
  misleads me; but, to my thinking, this last action of yours is worse than
  all the rest. Nature has constituted me the protector of my children. I
  shall always remember and resent the indelible injury you have done them.
  You have wounded me to the very heart, and have taught me to what a pitch
  the villainy of man can extend."
"Madam, I can be silent no longer. I see that you have by some means come
  to a hearing of the story of Mr. Falkland."
"I have. I am astonished you have the effrontery to pronounce his name.
  That name has been a denomination, as far back as my memory can reach, for
  the most exalted of mortals, the wisest and most generous of men."
"Madam, I owe it to myself to set you right on this subject. Mr.
  Falkland—"
"Mr. Williams, I see my children returning from the fields, and coming
  this way. The basest action you ever did was the obtruding yourself upon
  them as an instructor. I insist that you see them no more. I command you to
  be silent. I command you to withdraw. If you persist in your absurd
  resolution of expostulating with me, you must take some other time."
I could continue no longer. I was in a manner heart-broken through the
  whole of this dialogue. I could not think of protracting the pain of this
  admirable woman, upon whom, though I was innocent of the crimes she imputed
  to me, I had inflicted so much pain already. I yielded to the imperiousness
  of her commands, and withdrew.
I hastened, without knowing why, from the presence of Laura to my own
  habitation. Upon entering the house, an apartment of which I occupied, I
  found it totally deserted of its usual inhabitants. The woman and her
  children were gone to enjoy the freshness of the breeze. The husband was
  engaged in his usual out-door occupations. The doors of persons of the lower
  order in this part of the country are secured, in the day-time, only with a
  latch. I entered, and went into the kitchen of the family. Here, as I looked
  round, my eyes accidentally glanced upon a paper lying in one corner, which,
  by some association I was unable to explain, roused in me a strong sensation
  of suspicion and curiosity. I eagerly went towards it, caught it up, and
  found it to be the very paper of the WONDERFUL AND SURPRISING HISTORY OF
  CALEB WILLIAMS, the discovery of which, towards the close of my residence in
  London, had produced in me such inexpressible anguish.
This encounter at once cleared up all the mystery that hung upon my late
  transactions. Abhorred and intolerable certainty succeeded to the doubts
  which had haunted my mind. It struck me with the rapidity of lightning. I
  felt a sudden torpor and sickness that pervaded every fibre of my frame.
Was there no hope that remained for me? Was acquittal useless? Was there
  no period, past or in prospect, that could give relief to my sufferings? Was
  the odious and atrocious falsehood that had been invented against me, to
  follow me wherever I went, to strip me of character, to deprive me of the
  sympathy and good-will of mankind, to wrest from me the very bread by which
  life must be sustained?
For the space perhaps of half an hour the agony I felt from this
  termination to my tranquillity, and the expectation it excited of the enmity
  which would follow me through every retreat, was such as to bereave me of
  all consistent thinking, much more of the power of coming to any resolution.
  As soon as this giddiness and horror of the mind subsided, and the deadly
  calm that invaded my faculties was no more, one stiff and master gale gained
  the ascendancy, and drove me to an instant desertion of this late cherished
  retreat. I had no patience to enter into further remonstrance and
  explanation with the inhabitants of my present residence. I believed that it
  was in vain to hope to recover the favourable prepossession and tranquillity
  I had lately enjoyed. In encountering the prejudices that were thus armed
  against me, I should have to deal with a variety of dispositions, and,
  though I might succeed with some, I could not expect to succeed with all. I
  had seen too much of the reign of triumphant falsehood, to have that
  sanguine confidence in the effects of my innocence, which would have
  suggested itself to the mind of any other person of my propensities and my
  age. The recent instance which had occurred in my conversation with Laura
  might well contribute to discourage me. I could not endure the thought of
  opposing the venom that was thus scattered against me, in detail and through
  its minuter particles. If ever it should be necessary to encounter it, if I
  were pursued like a wild beast, till I could no longer avoid turning upon my
  hunters, I would then turn upon the true author of this unprincipled attack;
  I would encounter the calumny in its strong hold; I would rouse myself to an
  exertion hitherto unessayed; and, by the firmness, intrepidity, and
  unalterable constancy I should display, would yet compel mankind to believe
  Mr. Falkland a suborner and a murderer!

</div></body></text></TEI>