<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="15">CHAPTER II.
The reader will feel how rapidly I was advancing to the brink of the
  precipice. I had a confused apprehension of what I was doing, but I could
  not stop myself. "Is it possible," said I, "that Mr. Falkland, who is thus
  overwhelmed with a sense of the unmerited dishonour that has been fastened
  upon him in the face of the world, will long endure the presence of a raw
  and unfriended youth, who is perpetually bringing back that dishonour to his
  recollection, and who seems himself the most forward to entertain the
  accusation?"
I felt indeed that Mr. Falkland would not hastily incline to dismiss me,
  for the same reason that restrained him from many other actions, which might
  seem to savour of a too tender and ambiguous sensibility. But this
  reflection was little adapted to comfort me. That he should cherish in his
  heart a growing hatred against me, and that he should think himself obliged
  to retain me a continual thorn in his side, was an idea by no means of
  favourable augury to my future peace.
It was some time after this that, in clearing out a case of drawers, I
  found a paper that, by some accident, had slipped behind one of the drawers,
  and been overlooked. At another time perhaps my curiosity might have given
  way to the laws of decorum, and I should have restored it unopened to my
  master, its owner. But my eagerness for information had been too much
  stimulated by the preceding incidents, to allow me at present to neglect any
  occasion of obtaining it. The paper proved to be a letter written by the
  elder Hawkins, and from its contents seemed to have been penned when he had
  first been upon the point of absconding from the persecutions of Mr. Tyrrel.
  It was as follows:—
"Honourable Sir,
"I have waited some time in daily hope of your honour's return into these
  parts. Old Warnes and his dame, who are left to take care of your house,
  tell me they cannot say when that will be, nor justly in what part of
  England you are at present. For my share, misfortune comes so thick upon me,
  that I must determine upon something (that is for certain), and out of hand.
  Our squire, who I must own at first used me kindly enough, though I am
  afraid that was partly out of spite to squire Underwood, has since
  determined to be the ruin of me. Sir, I have been no craven; I fought it up
  stoutly; for after all, you know, God bless your honour! it is but a man to
  a man; but he has been too much for me.
"Perhaps if I were to ride over to the market-town and enquire of Munsle,
  your lawyer, he could tell me how to direct to you. But having hoped and
  waited o' this fashion, and all in vain, has put me upon other thoughts. I
  was in no hurry, sir, to apply to you; for I do not love to be a trouble to
  any body. I kept that for my last stake. Well, sir, and now that has failed
  me like, I am ashamed, as it were, to have thought of it. Have not I, thinks
  I, arms and legs as well as other people? I am driven out of house and home.
  Well, and what then? Sure I arn't a cabbage, that if you pull it out of the
  ground it must die. I am pennyless. True; and how many hundreds are there
  that live from hand to mouth all the days of their life? (Begging your
  honour's pardon) thinks I, if we little folks had but the wit to do for
  ourselves, the great folks would not be such maggotty changelings as they
  are. They would begin to look about them.
"But there is another thing that has swayed with me more than all the
  rest. I do not know how to tell you, sir,—My poor boy, my Leonard, the
  pride of my life, has been three weeks in the county jail. It is true
  indeed, sir. Squire Tyrrel put him there. Now, sir, every time that I lay my
  head upon my pillow under my own little roof, my heart smites me with the
  situation of my Leonard. I do not mean so much for the hardship; I do not so
  much matter that. I do not expect him to go through the world upon velvet! I
  am not such a fool. But who can tell what may hap in a jail! I have been
  three times to see him; and there is one man in the same quarter of the
  prison that looks so wicked! I do not much fancy the looks of the rest. To
  be sure, Leonard is as good a lad as ever lived. I think he will not give
  his mind to such. But come what will, I am determined he shall not stay
  among them twelve hours longer. I am an obstinate old fool perhaps; but I
  have taken it into my head, and I will do it. Do not ask me what. But, if I
  were to write to your honour, and wait for your answer, it might take a week
  or ten days more. I must not think of it!
"Squire Tyrrel is very headstrong, and you, your honour, might be a
  little hottish, or so. No, I would not have any body quarrel for me. There
  has been mischief enough done already; and I will get myself out of the way.
  So I write this, your honour, merely to unload my mind. I feel myself
  equally as much bound to respect and love you, as if you had done every
  thing for me, that I believe you would have done if things had chanced
  differently. It is most likely you will never hear of me any more. If it
  should be so, set your worthy heart at rest. I know myself too well, ever to
  be tempted to do any thing that is really bad. I have now my fortune to seek
  in the world. I have been used ill enough, God knows. But I bear no malice;
  my heart is at peace with all mankind; and I forgive every body. It is like
  enough that poor Leonard and I may have hardship enough to undergo, among
  strangers, and being obliged to hide ourselves like housebreakers or
  highwaymen. But I defy all the malice of fortune to make us do an ill thing.
  That consolation we will always keep against all the crosses of a
  heart-breaking world.
"God bless you!
  So prays,
  Your honour's humble servant to command,
  BENJAMIN HAWKINS."
I read this letter with considerable attention, and it occasioned me many
  reflections. To my way of thinking it contained a very interesting picture
  of a blunt, downright, honest mind. "It is a melancholy consideration," said
  I to myself; "but such is man! To have judged from appearances one would
  have said, this is a fellow to have taken fortune's buffets and rewards with
  an incorruptible mind. And yet see where it all ends! This man was capable
  of afterwards becoming a murderer, and finished his life at the gallows. O
  poverty! thou art indeed omnipotent! Thou grindest us into desperation; thou
  confoundest all our boasted and most deep-rooted principles; thou fillest us
  to the very brim with malice and revenge, and renderest us capable of acts
  of unknown horror! May I never be visited by thee in the fulness of thy
  power!"
Having satisfied my curiosity with respect to this paper, I took care to
  dispose of it in such a manner as that it should be found by Mr. Falkland;
  at the same time that, in obedience to the principle which at present
  governed me with absolute dominion, I was willing that the way in which it
  offered itself to his attention should suggest to him the idea that it had
  possibly passed through my hands. The next morning I saw him, and I exerted
  myself to lead the conversation, which by this time I well knew how to
  introduce, by insensible degrees to the point I desired. After several
  previous questions, remarks, and rejoinders, I continued:—
"Well, sir, after all, I cannot help feeling very uncomfortably as to my
  ideas of human nature, when I find that there is no dependence to be placed
  upon its perseverance, and that, at least among the illiterate, the most
  promising appearances may end in the foulest disgrace."
"You think, then, that literature and a cultivated mind are the only
  assurance for the constancy of our principles!"
"Humph!--why do you suppose, sir, that learning and ingenuity do not
  often serve people rather to hide their crimes than to restrain them from
  committing them? History tells us strange things in that respect."
"Williams," said Mr. Falkland, a little disturbed, "you are extremely
  given to censure and severity."
"I hope not. I am sure I am most fond of looking on the other side of the
  picture, and considering how many men have been aspersed, and even at some
  time or other almost torn to pieces by their fellow-creatures, whom, when
  properly understood, we find worthy of our reverence and love."
"Indeed," replied Mr. Falkland, with a sigh, "when I consider these
  things I do not wonder at the dying exclamation of Brutus, 'O Virtue, I
  sought thee as a substance, but I find thee an empty name!' I am too much
  inclined to be of his opinion."
"Why, to be sure, sir, innocence and guilt are too much confounded in
  human life. I remember an affecting story of a poor man in the reign of
  Queen Elizabeth, who would have infallibly been hanged for murder upon the
  strength of circumstantial evidence, if the person really concerned had not
  been himself upon the jury and prevented it."
In saying this I touched the spring that wakened madness in his mind. He
  came up to me with a ferocious countenance, as if determined to force me
  into a confession of my thoughts. A sudden pang however seemed to change his
  design! he drew back with trepidation, and exclaimed, "Detested be the
  universe, and the laws that govern it! Honour, justice, virtue, are all the
  juggle of knaves! If it were in my power I would instantly crush the whole
  system into nothing!"
I replied; "Oh, sir! things are not so bad as you imagine. The world was
  made for men of sense to do what they will with. Its affairs cannot be
  better than in the direction of the genuine heroes; and as in the end they
  will be found the truest friends of the whole, so the multitude have nothing
  to do but to look on, be fashioned, and admire."
Mr. Falkland made a powerful effort to recover his tranquillity.
  "Williams," said he, "you instruct me well. You have a right notion of
  things, and I have great hopes of you. I will be more of a man; I will
  forget the past, and do better for the time to come. The future, the future
  is always our own."
"I am sorry, sir, that I have given you pain. I am afraid to say all that
  I think. But it is my opinion that mistakes will ultimately be cleared up,
  justice done, and the true state of things come to light, in spite of the
  false colours that may for a time obscure it."
The idea I suggested did not give Mr. Falkland the proper degree of
  delight. He suffered a temporary relapse. "Justice!"—he muttered. "I
  do not know what is justice. My case is not within the reach of common
  remedies; perhaps of none. I only know that I am miserable. I began life
  with the best intentions and the most fervid philanthropy; and here I
  am—miserable—miserable beyond expression or endurance."
Having said this, he seemed suddenly to recollect himself, and re-assumed
  his accustomed dignity and command. "How came this conversation?" cried he.
  "Who gave you a right to be my confidant? Base, artful wretch that you are!
  learn to be more respectful! Are my passions to be wound and unwound by an
  insolent domestic? Do you think I will be an instrument to be played on at
  your pleasure, till you have extorted all the treasures of my soul? Begone,
  and fear lest you be made to pay for the temerity you have already
  committed!"
There was an energy and determination in the gestures with which these
  words were accompanied, that did not admit of their being disputed. My mouth
  was closed; I felt as if deprived of all share of activity, and was only
  able silently and passively to quit the apartment.

</div></body></text></TEI>