<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="7">CHAPTER VII.
Mr. Tyrrel consulted his old confident respecting the plan he should
  pursue; who, sympathising as he did in the brutality and insolence of his
  friend, had no idea that an insignificant girl, without either wealth or
  beauty, ought to be allowed for a moment to stand in the way of the
  gratifications of a man of Mr. Tyrrel's importance. The first idea of her
  now unrelenting kinsman was to thrust her from his doors, and leave her to
  seek her bread as she could. But he was conscious that this proceeding would
  involve him in considerable obloquy; and he at length fixed upon a scheme
  which, at the same time that he believed it would sufficiently shelter his
  reputation, would much more certainly secure her mortification and
  punishment.
For this purpose he fixed upon a young man of twenty, the son of one
  Grimes, who occupied a small farm, the property of his confident. This
  fellow he resolved to impose as a husband on Miss Melville, who, he shrewdly
  suspected, guided by the tender sentiments she had unfortunately conceived
  for Mr. Falkland, would listen with reluctance to any matrimonial proposal.
  Grimes he selected as being in all respects the diametrical reverse of Mr.
  Falkland. He was not precisely a lad of vicious propensities, but in an
  inconceivable degree boorish and uncouth. His complexion was scarcely human;
  his features were coarse, and strangely discordant and disjointed from each
  other. His lips were thick, and the tone of his voice broad and unmodulated.
  His legs were of equal size from one end to the other, and his feet
  misshapen and clumsy. He had nothing spiteful or malicious in his
  disposition, but he was a total stranger to tenderness; he could not feel
  for those refinements in others, of which he had no experience in himself.
  He was an expert boxer: his inclination led him to such amusements as were
  most boisterous; and he delighted in a sort of manual sarcasm, which he
  could not conceive to be very injurious, as it left no traces behind it. His
  general manners were noisy and obstreperous; inattentive to others; and
  obstinate and unyielding, not from any cruelty and ruggedness of temper, but
  from an incapacity to conceive those finer feelings, that make so large a
  part of the history of persons who are cast in a gentler mould.
Such was the uncouth and half-civilised animal, which the industrious
  malice of Mr. Tyrrel fixed upon as most happily adapted to his purpose.
  Emily had hitherto been in an unusual degree exempted from the oppression of
  despotism. Her happy insignificance had served her as a protection. No one
  thought it worth his while to fetter her with those numerous petty
  restrictions with which the daughters of opulence are commonly tormented.
  She had the wildness, as well as the delicate frame, of the bird that
  warbles unmolested in its native groves.
When therefore she heard from her kinsman the proposal of Mr. Grimes for
  a husband, she was for a moment silent with astonishment at so unexpected a
  suggestion. But as soon as she recovered her speech, she replied, "No, sir,
  I do not want a husband."
"You do! Are not you always hankering after the men? It is high time you
  should be settled."
"Mr. Grimes! No, indeed! when I do have a husband, it shall not be such a
  man as Mr. Grimes neither."
"Be silent! How dare you give yourself such unaccountable liberties?"
"Lord, I wonder what I should do with him. You might as well give me your
  great rough water-dog, and bid me make him a silk cushion to lie in my
  dressing-room. Besides, sir, Grimes is a common labouring man, and I am sure
  I have always heard my aunt say that ours is a very great family."
"It is a lie! Our family! have you the impudence to think yourself one of
  our family?"
"Why, sir, was not your grandpapa my grandpapa? How then can we be of a
  different family?"
"From the strongest reason in the world. You are the daughter of a
  rascally Scotchman, who spent every shilling of my aunt Lucy's fortune, and
  left you a beggar. You have got an hundred pounds, and Grimes's father
  promises to give him as much. How dare you look down upon your equals?"
"Indeed, sir, I am not proud. But, indeed and indeed, I can never love
  Mr. Grimes. I am very happy as I am: why should I be married?"
"Silence your prating! Grimes will be here this afternoon. Look that you
  behave well to him. If you do not, he will remember and repay, when you
  least like it."
"Nay, I am sure, sir—you are not in earnest?"
"Not in earnest! Damn me, but we will see that. I can tell what you would
  be at. You had rather be Mr. Falkland's miss, than the wife of a plain
  downright yeoman. But I shall take care of you.—Ay, this comes of
  indulgence. You must be taken down, miss. You must be taught the difference
  between high-flown notions and realities. Mayhap you may take it a little in
  dudgeon or so; but never mind that. Pride always wants a little smarting. If
  you should be brought to shame, it is I that shall bear the blame of
  it."
The tone in which Mr. Tyrrel spoke was so different from any thing to
  which Miss Melville had been accustomed, that she felt herself wholly unable
  to determine what construction to put upon it. Sometimes she thought he had
  really formed a plan for imposing upon her a condition that she could not
  bear so much as to think of. But presently she rejected this idea as an
  unworthy imputation upon her kinsman, and concluded that it was only his
  way, and that all he meant was to try her. To be resolved however, she
  determined to consult her constant adviser, Mrs. Jakeman, and accordingly
  repeated to her what had passed. Mrs. Jakeman saw the whole in a very
  different light from that in which Emily had conceived it, and trembled for
  the future peace of her beloved ward.
"Lord bless me, my dear mamma!" cried Emily, (this was the appellation
  she delighted to bestow upon the good housekeeper,) "you cannot think so?
  But I do not care. I will never marry Grimes, happen what will."
"But how will you help yourself? My master will oblige you."
"Nay, now you think you are talking to a child indeed. It is I am to have
  the man, not Mr. Tyrrel. Do you think I will let any body else choose a
  husband for me? I am not such a fool as that neither."
"Ah, Emily! you little know the disadvantages of your situation. Your
  cousin is a violent man, and perhaps will turn you out of doors, if you
  oppose him."
"Oh, mamma! it is very wicked of you to say so. I am sure Mr. Tyrrel is a
  very good man, though he be a little cross now and then. He knows very well
  that I am right to have a will of my own in such a thing as this, and nobody
  is punished for doing what is right."
"Nobody ought, my dear child. But there are very wicked and tyrannical
  men in the world."
"Well, well, I will never believe my cousin is one of these."
"I hope he is not."
"And if he were, what then? To be sure I should he very sorry to make him
  angry."
"What then! Why then my poor Emily would be a beggar. Do you think I
  could bear to see that?"
"No, no. Mr. Tyrrel has just told me that I have a hundred pounds. But if
  I had no fortune, is not that the case with a thousand other folks? Why
  should I grieve, for what they bear and are merry? Do not make yourself
  uneasy, mamma. I am determined that I will do any thing rather than marry
  Grimes; that is what I will."
Mrs. Jakeman could not bear the uneasy state of suspense in which this
  conversation left her mind, and went immediately to the squire to have her
  doubts resolved. The manner in which she proposed the question, sufficiently
  indicated the judgment she had formed of the match.
"That is true," said Mr. Tyrrel, "I wanted to speak to you about this
  affair. The girl has got unaccountable notions in her head, that will be the
  ruin of her. You perhaps can tell where she had them. But, be that as it
  will, it is high time something should be done. The shortest way is the
  best, and to keep things well while they are well. In short, I am determined
  she shall marry this lad: you do not know any harm of him, do you? You have
  a good deal of influence with her, and I desire, do you see, that you will
  employ it to lead her to her good: you had best, I can tell you. She is a
  pert vixen! By and by she would be a whore, and at last no better than a
  common trull, and rot upon a dunghill, if I were not at all these pains to
  save her from destruction. I would make her an honest farmer's wife, and my
  pretty miss cannot bear the thoughts of it!"
In the afternoon Grimes came according to appointment, and was left alone
  with the young lady.
"Well, miss," said he, "it seems the squire has a mind to make us man and
  wife. For my part, I cannot say I should have thought of it. But, being as
  how the squire has broke the ice, if so be as you like of the match, why I
  am your man. Speak the word; a nod is as good as a wink to a blind
  horse."
Emily was already sufficiently mortified at the unexpected proposal of
  Mr. Tyrrel. She was confounded at the novelty of the situation, and still
  more at the uncultivated rudeness of her lover, which even exceeded her
  expectation. This confusion was interpreted by Grimes into diffidence.
"Come, come, never be cast down. Put a good face upon it. What though? My
  first sweetheart was Bet Butterfield, but what of that? What must be must
  be; grief will never fill the belly. She was a fine strapping wench, that is
  the truth of it! five foot ten inches, and as stout as a trooper. Oh, she
  would do a power of work! Up early and down late; milked ten cows with her
  own hands; on with her cardinal, rode to market between her panniers, fair
  weather and foul, hail, blow, or snow. It would have done your heart good to
  have seen her frost-bitten cheeks, as red as a beefen from her own orchard!
  Ah! she was a maid of mettle; would romp with the harvestmen, slap one upon
  the back, wrestle with another, and had a rogue's trick and a joke for all
  round. Poor girl! she broke her neck down stairs at a christening. To be
  sure I shall never meet with her fellow! But never you mind that; I do not
  doubt that I shall find more in you upon further acquaintance. As coy and
  bashful as you seem, I dare say you are rogue enough at bottom. When I have
  touzled and rumpled you a little, we shall see. I am no chicken, miss,
  whatever you may think. I know what is what, and can see as far into a
  millstone as another. Ay, ay; you will come to. The fish will snap at the
  bait, never doubt it. Yes, yes, we shall rub on main well together."
Emily by this time had in some degree mustered up her spirits, and began,
  though with hesitation, to thank Mr. Grimes for his good opinion, but to
  confess that she could never be brought to favour his addresses. She
  therefore entreated him to desist from all further application. This
  remonstrance on her part would have become more intelligible, had it not
  been for his boisterous manners and extravagant cheerfulness, which
  indisposed him to silence, and made him suppose that at half a word he had
  sufficient intimation of another's meaning. Mr. Tyrrel, in the mean time,
  was too impatient not to interrupt the scene before they could have time to
  proceed far in explanation; and he was studious in the sequel to prevent the
  young folks from being too intimately acquainted with each other's
  inclinations. Grimes, of consequence, attributed the reluctance of Miss
  Melville to maiden coyness, and the skittish shyness of an unbroken filly.
  Indeed, had it been otherwise, it is not probable that it would have made
  any effectual impression upon him; as he was always accustomed to consider
  women as made for the recreation of the men, and to exclaim against the
  weakness of people who taught them to imagine they were to judge for
  themselves.
As the suit proceeded, and Miss Melville saw more of her new admirer, her
  antipathy increased. But, though her character was unspoiled by those false
  wants, which frequently make people of family miserable while they have
  every thing that nature requires within their reach, yet she had been little
  used to opposition, and was terrified at the growing sternness of her
  kinsman. Sometimes she thought of flying from a house which was now become
  her dungeon; but the habits of her youth, and her ignorance of the world,
  made her shrink from this project, when she contemplated it more nearly,
  Mrs. Jakeman, indeed, could not think with patience of young Grimes as a
  husband for her darling Emily; but her prudence determined her to resist
  with all her might the idea on the part of the young lady of proceeding to
  extremities. She could not believe that Mr. Tyrrel would persist in such an
  unaccountable persecution, and she exhorted Miss Melville to forget for a
  moment the unaffected independence of her character, and pathetically to
  deprecate her cousin's obstinacy. She had great confidence in the ingenuous
  eloquence of her ward. Mrs. Jakeman did not know what was passing in the
  breast of the tyrant.
Miss Melville complied with the suggestion of her mamma. One morning
  immediately after breakfast, she went to her harpsichord, and played one
  after another several of those airs that were most the favourites of Mr.
  Tyrrel. Mrs. Jakeman had retired; the servants were gone to their respective
  employments. Mr. Tyrrel would have gone also; his mind was untuned, and he
  did not take the pleasure he had been accustomed to take in the musical
  performances of Emily. But her finger was now more tasteful than common. Her
  mind was probably wrought up to a firmer and bolder tone, by the
  recollection of the cause she was going to plead; at the same time that it
  was exempt from those incapacitating tremors which would have been felt by
  one that dared not look poverty in the face. Mr. Tyrrel was unable to leave
  the apartment. Sometimes he traversed it with impatient steps; then he hung
  over the poor innocent whose powers were exerted to please him; at length he
  threw himself in a chair opposite, with his eyes turned towards Emily. It
  was easy to trace the progress of his emotions. The furrows into which his
  countenance was contracted were gradually relaxed; his features were
  brightened into a smile; the kindness with which he had upon former
  occasions contemplated Emily seemed to revive in his heart.
Emily watched her opportunity. As soon as she had finished one of the
  pieces, she rose and went to Mr. Tyrrel.
"Now, have not I done it nicely? and after this will not you give me a
  reward?"
"A reward! Ay, come here, and I will give you a kiss."
"No, that is not it. And yet you have not kissed me this many a day.
  Formerly you said you loved me, and called me your Emily. I am sure you did
  not love me better than I loved you. You have not forgot all the kindness
  you once had for me?" added she anxiously.
"Forgot? No, no. How can you ask such a question? You shall be my dear
  Emily still!"
"Ah, those were happy times!" she replied, a little mournfully. "Do you
  know, cousin, I wish I could wake, and find that the last month—only
  about a month—was a dream?"
"What do you mean by that?" said Mr. Tyrrel with an altered voice. "Have
  a care! Do not put me out of humour. Do not come with your romantic notions
  now."
"No, no: I have no romantic notions in my head. I speak of something upon
  which the happiness of my life depends."
"I see what you would be at. Be silent. You know it is to no purpose to
  plague me with your stubbornness. You will not let me be in good humour with
  you for a moment. What my mind is determined upon about Grimes, all the
  world shall not move me to give up."
"Dear, dear cousin! why, but consider now. Grimes is a rough rustic lout,
  like Orson in the story-book. He wants a wife like himself. He would be as
  uneasy and as much at a loss with me, as I with him. Why should we both of
  us be forced to do what neither of us is inclined to? I cannot think what
  could ever have put it into your head. But now, for goodness' sake, give it
  up! Marriage is a serious thing. You should not think of joining two people
  for a whim, who are neither of them fit for one another in any respect in
  the world. We should feel mortified and disappointed all our lives. Month
  would go after month, and year after year, and I could never hope to be my
  own, but by the death of a person I ought to love. I am sure, sir, you
  cannot mean me all this harm. What have I done, that I should deserve to
  have you for an enemy?"
"I am not your enemy. I tell you that it is necessary to put you out of
  harm's way. But, if I were your enemy, I could not be a worse torment to you
  than you are to me. Are not you continually singing the praises of Falkland?
  Are not you in love with Falkland? That man is a legion of devils to me! I
  might as well have been a beggar! I might as well have been a dwarf or a
  monster! Time was when I was thought entitled to respect. But now, debauched
  by this Frenchified rascal, they call me rude, surly, a tyrant! It is true
  that I cannot talk in finical phrases, flatter people with hypocritical
  praise, or suppress the real feelings of my mind. The scoundrel knows his
  pitiful advantages, and insults me upon them without ceasing. He is my rival
  and my persecutor; and, at last, as if all this were not enough, he has
  found means to spread the pestilence in my own family. You, whom we took up
  out of charity, the chance-born brat of a stolen marriage! you must turn
  upon your benefactor, and wound me in the point that of all others I could
  least bear. If I were your enemy, should not I have reason? Could I ever
  inflict upon you such injuries as you have made me suffer? And who are you?
  The lives of fifty such cannot atone for an hour of my uneasiness. If you
  were to linger for twenty years upon the rack, you would never feel what I
  have felt. But I am your friend. I see which way you are going; and I am
  determined to save you from this thief, this hypocritical destroyer of us
  all. Every moment that the mischief is left to itself, it does but make bad
  worse; and I am determined to save you out of hand."
The angry expostulations of Mr. Tyrrel suggested new ideas to the tender
  mind of Miss Melville. He had never confessed the emotions of his soul so
  explicitly before; but the tempest of his thoughts suffered him to be no
  longer master of himself. She saw with astonishment that he was the
  irreconcilable foe of Mr. Falkland, whom she had fondly imagined it was the
  same thing to know and admire; and that he harboured a deep and rooted
  resentment against herself. She recoiled, without well knowing why, before
  the ferocious passions of her kinsman, and was convinced that she had
  nothing to hope from his implacable temper. But her alarm was the prelude of
  firmness, and not of cowardice.
"No, sir," replied she, "indeed I will not be driven any way that you
  happen to like. I have been used to obey you, and, in all that is
  reasonable, I will obey you still. But you urge me too far. What do you tell
  me of Mr. Falkland? Have I ever done any thing to deserve your unkind
  suspicions? I am innocent, and will continue innocent. Mr. Grimes is well
  enough, and will no doubt find women that like him; but he is not fit for
  me, and torture shall not force me to be his wife."
Mr. Tyrrel was not a little astonished at the spirit which Emily
  displayed upon this occasion. He had calculated too securely upon the
  general mildness and suavity of her disposition. He now endeavoured to
  qualify the harshness of his former sentiments.
"God damn my soul! And so you can scold, can you? You expect every body
  to turn out of his way, and fetch and carry, just as you please? I could
  find in my heart—But you know my mind. I insist upon it that you let
  Grimes court you, and that you lay aside your sulks, and give him a fair
  hearing. Will you do that? If then you persist in your wilfulness, why
  there, I suppose, is an end of the matter. Do not think that any body is
  going to marry you, whether you will or no. You are no such mighty prize, I
  assure you. If you knew your own interest, you would be glad to take the
  young fellow while he is willing."
Miss Melville rejoiced in the prospect, which the last words of her
  kinsman afforded her, of a termination at no great distance to her present
  persecutions. Mrs. Jakeman, to whom she communicated them, congratulated
  Emily on the returning moderation and good sense of the squire, and herself
  on her prudence in having urged the young lady to this happy expostulation.
  But their mutual felicitations lasted not long. Mr. Tyrrel informed Mrs.
  Jakeman of the necessity in which he found himself of sending her to a
  distance, upon a business which would not fail to detain her several weeks;
  and, though the errand by no means wore an artificial or ambiguous face, the
  two friends drew a melancholy presage from this ill-timed separation. Mrs.
  Jakeman, in the mean time, exhorted her ward to persevere, reminded her of
  the compunction which had already been manifested by her kinsman, and
  encouraged her to hope every thing from her courage and good temper. Emily,
  on her part, though grieved at the absence of her protector and counsellor
  at so interesting a crisis, was unable to suspect Mr. Tyrrel of such a degree
  either of malice or duplicity as could afford ground for serious alarm. She
  congratulated herself upon her delivery from so alarming a persecution, and
  drew a prognostic of future success from this happy termination of the first
  serious affair of her life. She exchanged a state of fortitude and alarm for
  her former pleasing dreams respecting Mr. Falkland. These she bore without
  impatience. She was even taught by the uncertainty of the event to desire to
  prolong, rather than abridge, a situation which might be delusive, but which
  was not without its pleasures.

</div></body></text></TEI>