<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="8">CHAPTER VIII.
Nothing could be further from Mr. Tyrrel's intention than to suffer his
  project to be thus terminated. No sooner was he freed from the fear of his
  housekeeper's interference, than he changed the whole system of his conduct.
  He ordered Miss Melville to be closely confined to her apartment, and
  deprived of all means of communicating her situation to any one out of his
  own house. He placed over her a female servant, in whose discretion he could
  confide, and who, having formerly been honoured with the amorous notices of
  the squire, considered the distinctions that were paid to Emily at Tyrrel
  Place as an usurpation upon her more reasonable claims. The squire himself
  did every thing in his power to blast the young lady's reputation, and
  represented to his attendants these precautions as necessary, to prevent her
  from eloping to his neighbour, and plunging herself in total ruin.
As soon as Miss Melville had been twenty-four hours in durance, and there
  was some reason to suppose that her spirit might be subdued to the emergency
  of her situation, Mr. Tyrrel thought proper to go to her, to explain the
  grounds of her present treatment, and acquaint her with the only means by
  which she could hope for a change. Emily no sooner saw him, than she turned
  towards him with an air of greater firmness than perhaps she had ever
  assumed in her life, and accosted him thus:—
"Well, sir, is it you? I wanted to see you. It seems I am shut up here by
  your orders. What does this mean? What right have you to make a prisoner of
  me? What do I owe you? Your mother left me a hundred pounds: have you ever
  offered to make any addition to my fortune? But, if you had, I do not want
  it. I do not pretend to be better than the children of other poor parents; I
  can maintain myself as they do. I prefer liberty to wealth. I see you are
  surprised at the resolution I exert. But ought I not to turn again, when I
  am trampled upon? I should have left you before now, if Mrs. Jakeman had not
  over-persuaded me, and if I had not thought better of you than by your
  present behaviour I find you deserve. But now, sir, I intend to leave your
  house this moment, and insist upon it, that you do not endeavour to prevent
  me."
Thus saying, she rose, and went towards the door, while Mr. Tyrrel stood
  thunderstruck at her magnanimity. Seeing, however, that she was upon the
  point of being out of the reach of his power, he recovered himself and
  pulled her back.
"What is in the wind now? Do you think, strumpet; that you shall get the
  better of me by sheer impudence? Sit down! rest you satisfied!--So you want
  to know by what right you are here, do you? By the right of possession. This
  house is mine, and you are in my power. There is no Mrs. Jakeman now to
  spirit you away; no, nor no Falkland to bully for you. I have countermined
  you, damn me! and blown up your schemes. Do you think I will be contradicted
  and opposed for nothing? When did you ever know any body resist my will
  without being made to repent? And shall I now be browbeaten by a
  chitty-faced girl?—I have not given you a fortune! Damn you! who
  brought you up? I will make you a bill for clothing and lodging. Do not you
  know that every creditor has a right to stop his runaway debtor. You may
  think as you please; but here you are till you marry Grimes. Heaven and
  earth shall not prevent but I will get the better of your obstinacy!"
"Ungenerous, unmerciful man! and so it is enough for you that I have
  nobody to defend me! But I am not so helpless as you may imagine. You may
  imprison my body, but you cannot conquer my mind. Marry Mr. Grimes! And is
  this the way to bring me to your purpose? Every hardship I suffer puts still
  further distant the end for which I am thus unjustly treated. You are not
  used to have your will contradicted! When did I ever contradict it? And, in
  a concern that is so completely my own, shall my will go for nothing? Would
  you lay down this rule for yourself, and suffer no other creature to take
  the benefit of it? I want nothing of you: how dare you refuse me the
  privilege of a reasonable being, to live unmolested in poverty and
  innocence? What sort of a man do you show yourself, you that lay claim to
  the respect and applause of every one that knows you?"
The spirited reproaches of Emily had at first the effect to fill Mr.
  Tyrrel with astonishment, and make him feel abashed and overawed in the
  presence of this unprotected innocent. But his confusion was the result of
  surprise. When the first emotion wore off, he cursed himself for being moved
  by her expostulations; and was ten times more exasperated against her, for
  daring to defy his resentment at a time when she had every thing to fear.
  His despotic and unforgiving propensities stimulated him to a degree little
  short of madness. At the same time his habits, which were pensive and
  gloomy, led him to meditate a variety of schemes to punish her obstinacy. He
  began to suspect that there was little hope of succeeding by open force, and
  therefore determined to have recourse to treachery.
He found in Grimes an instrument sufficiently adapted to his purpose.
  This fellow, without an atom of intentional malice, was fitted, by the mere
  coarseness of his perceptions, for the perpetration of the greatest
  injuries. He regarded both injury and advantage merely as they related to
  the gratifications of appetite; and considered it an essential in true
  wisdom, to treat with insult the effeminacy of those who suffer themselves
  to be tormented with ideal misfortunes. He believed that no happier destiny
  could befal a young woman than to be his wife; and he conceived that that
  termination would amply compensate for any calamities she might suppose
  herself to undergo in the interval. He was therefore easily prevailed upon,
  by certain temptations which Mr. Tyrrel knew how to employ, to take part in
  the plot into which Miss Melville was meant to be betrayed.
Matters being thus prepared, Mr. Tyrrel proceeded, through the means of
  the gaoler (for the experience he already had of personal discussion did not
  incline him to repeat his visits), to play upon the fears of his prisoner.
  This woman, sometimes under the pretence of friendship, and sometimes with
  open malice, informed Emily, from time to time, of the preparations that
  were making for her marriage. One day, "the squire had rode over to look at
  a neat little farm which was destined for the habitation of the new-married
  couple;" and at another, "a quantity of live stock and household furniture
  was procured, that every thing might be ready for their reception." She then
  told her "of a licence that was bought, a parson in readiness, and a day
  fixed for the nuptials." When Emily endeavoured, though with increased
  misgivings, to ridicule these proceedings as absolutely nugatory without her
  consent, her artful gouvernante related several stories of forced marriages,
  and assured her that neither protestations, nor silence, nor fainting, would
  be of any avail, either to suspend the ceremony, or to set it aside when
  performed.
The situation of Miss Melville was in an eminent degree pitiable. She had
  no intercourse but with her persecutors. She had not a human being with whom
  to consult, who might afford her the smallest degree of consolation and
  encouragement. She had fortitude; but it was neither confirmed nor directed
  by the dictates of experience. It could not therefore be expected to be so
  inflexible, as with better information it would, no doubt, have been found.
  She had a clear and noble spirit; but she had some of her sex's errors. Her
  mind sunk under the uniform terrors with which she was assailed, and her
  health became visibly impaired.
Her firmness being thus far undermined, Grimes, in pursuance of his
  instructions, took care, in his next interview, to throw out an insinuation
  that, for his own part, he had never cared for the match, and since she was
  so averse to it, would be better pleased that it should never take place.
  Between one and the other however, he was got into a scrape, and now he
  supposed he must marry, will he, nill he. The two squires would infallibly
  ruin him upon the least appearance of backwardness on his part, as they were
  accustomed to do every inferior that resisted their will. Emily was rejoiced
  to find her admirer in so favourable a disposition; and earnestly pressed
  him to give effect to this humane declaration. Her representations were full
  of eloquence and energy. Grimes appeared to be moved at the fervency of her
  manner; but objected the resentment of Mr. Tyrrel and his landlord. At
  length, however, he suggested a project, in consequence of which he might
  assist her in her escape, without its ever coming to their knowledge, as,
  indeed, there was no likelihood that their suspicions would fix upon him.
  "To be sure," said he, "you have refused me in a disdainful sort of a way,
  as a man may say. Mayhap you thought I was no better 'an a brute: but I bear
  you no malice, and I will show you that I am more kind-hearted 'an you have
  been willing to think. It is a strange sort of a vagary you have taken, to
  stand in your own light, and disoblige all your friends. But if you are
  resolute, do you see? I scorn to be the husband of a lass that is not every
  bit as willing as I; and so I will even help to put you in a condition to
  follow your own inclinations."
Emily listened to these suggestions at first with eagerness and
  approbation. But her fervency somewhat abated, when they came to discuss the
  minute parts of the undertaking. It was necessary, as Grimes informed her,
  that her escape should be effected in the dead of the night. He would
  conceal himself for that purpose in the garden, and be provided with false
  keys, by which to deliver her from her prison. These circumstances were by
  no means adapted to calm her perturbed imagination. To throw herself into
  the arms of the man whose intercourse she was employing every method to
  avoid, and whom, under the idea of a partner for life, she could least of
  all men endure, was, no doubt, an extraordinary proceeding. The attendant
  circumstances of darkness and solitude aggravated the picture. The situation
  of Tyrrel Place was uncommonly lonely; it was three miles from the nearest
  village, and not less than seven from that in which Mrs. Jakeman's sister
  resided, under whose protection Miss Melville was desirous of placing
  herself. The ingenuous character of Emily did not allow her once to suspect
  Grimes of intending to make an ungenerous and brutal advantage of these
  circumstances; but her mind involuntarily revolted against the idea of
  committing herself, alone, to the disposal of a man, whom she had lately
  been accustomed to consider as the instrument of her treacherous
  relation.
After having for some time revolved these considerations, she thought of
  the expedient of desiring Grimes to engage Mrs. Jakeman's sister to wait for
  her at the outside of the garden. But this Grimes peremptorily refused. He
  even flew into a passion at the proposal. It showed very little gratitude,
  to desire him to disclose to other people his concern in this dangerous
  affair. For his part, he was determined, in consideration of his own safety,
  never to appear in it to any living soul. If Miss did not believe him, when
  he made this proposal out of pure good-nature, and would not trust him a
  single inch, she might even see to the consequences herself. He was resolved
  to condescend no further to the whims of a person who, in her treatment of
  him, had shown herself as proud as Lucifer himself.
Emily exerted herself to appease his resentment; but all the eloquence of
  her new confederate could not prevail upon her instantly to give up her
  objection. She desired till the next day to consider of it. The day after
  was fixed by Mr. Tyrrel for the marriage ceremony. In the mean time she was
  pestered with intimations, in a thousand forms, of the fate that so nearly
  awaited her. The preparations were so continued, methodical, and regular, as
  to produce in her the most painful and aching anxiety. If her heart attained
  a moment's intermission upon the subject, her female attendant was sure, by
  some sly hint or sarcastical remark, to put a speedy termination to her
  tranquillity. She felt herself, as she afterwards remarked, alone,
  uninstructed, just broken loose, as it were, from the trammels of infancy,
  without one single creature to concern himself in her fate. She, who till
  then never knew an enemy, had now, for three weeks, not seen the glimpse of
  a human countenance, that she had not good reason to consider as wholly
  estranged to her at least, if not unrelentingly bent on her destruction. She
  now, for the first time, experienced the anguish of never having known her
  parents, and being cast upon the charity of people with whom she had too
  little equality, to hope to receive from them the offices of friendship.
The succeeding night was filled with the most anxious thoughts. When a
  momentary oblivion stole upon her senses, her distempered imagination
  conjured up a thousand images of violence and falsehood; she saw herself in
  the hands of her determined enemies, who did not hesitate by the most daring
  treachery to complete her ruin. Her waking thoughts were not more consoling.
  The struggle was too great for her constitution. As morning approached, she
  resolved, at all hazards, to put herself into the hands of Grimes. This
  determination was no sooner made, than she felt her heart sensibly
  lightened. She could not conceive any evil which could result from this
  proceeding, that deserved to be put in the balance against those which,
  under the roof of her kinsman, appeared unavoidable.
When she communicated her determination to Grimes, it was not possible to
  say whether he received pleasure or pain from the intimation. He smiled
  indeed; but his smile was accompanied by a certain abrupt ruggedness of
  countenance, so that it might equally well be the smile of sarcasm or of
  congratulation. He, however, renewed his assurances of fidelity to his
  engagements and punctuality of execution. Meanwhile the day was interspersed
  with nuptial presents and preparations, all indicating the firmness as well
  as security of the directors of the scene. Emily had hoped that, as the
  crisis approached, they might have remitted something of their usual
  diligence. She was resolved, in that case, if a fair opportunity had
  offered, to give the slip both to her jailors, and to her new and
  reluctantly chosen confederate. But, though extremely vigilant for that
  purpose, she found the execution of the idea impracticable.
At length the night, so critical to her happiness, approached. The mind
  of Emily could not fail, on this occasion, to be extremely agitated. She had
  first exerted all her perspicacity to elude the vigilance of her attendant.
  This insolent and unfeeling tyrant, instead of any relentings, had only
  sought to make sport of her anxiety. Accordingly, in one instance she hid
  herself, and, suffering Emily to suppose that the coast was clear, met her
  at the end of the gallery, near the top of the staircase. "How do you do, my
  dear?" said she, with an insulting tone. "And so the little dear thought
  itself cunning enough to outwit me, did it? Oh, it was a sly little gipsy!
  Go, go back, love; troop!" Emily felt deeply the trick that was played upon
  her. She sighed, but disdained to return any answer to this low vulgarity.
  Being once more in her chamber, she sat down in a chair, and remained buried
  in reverie for more than two hours. After this she went to her drawers, and
  turned over, in a hurrying confused way, her linen and clothes, having in
  her mind the provision it would be necessary to make for her elopement. Her
  jailor officiously followed her from place to place, and observed what she
  did for the present in silence. It was now the hour of rest. "Good night,
  child," said this saucy girl, in the act of retiring. "It is time to lock
  up. For the few next hours, the time is your own. Make the best use of it!
  Do'ee think ee can creep out at the key-hole, lovey? At eight o'clock you
  see me again. And then, and then," added she, clapping her hands, "it is all
  over. The sun is not surer to rise, than you and your honest man to be made
  one."
There was something in the tone with which this slut uttered her
  farewell, that suggested the question to Emily, "What does she mean? Is it
  possible that she should know what has been planned for the few next
  hours?"—This was the first moment that suspicion had offered itself,
  and its continuance was short. With an aching heart she folded up the few
  necessaries she intended to take with her. She instinctively listened, with
  an anxiety that would almost have enabled her to hear the stirring of a
  leaf. From time to time she thought her ear was struck with the sound of
  feet; but the treading, if treading it were, was so soft, that she could
  never ascertain whether it were a real sound, or the mere creature of the
  fancy. Then all was still, as if the universal motion had been at rest. By
  and by she conceived she overheard a noise as of buzzing and low-muttered
  speech. Her heart palpitated; for a second time she began to doubt the
  honesty of Grimes. The suggestion was now more anxious than before; but it
  was too late. Presently she heard the sound of a key in her chamber-door,
  and the rustic made his appearance. She started, and cried, "Are we
  discovered? did not I hear you speak?" Grimes advanced on tiptoe with his
  finger to his lip. "No, no," replied he, "all is safe!" He took her by the
  hand, led her in silence out of the house, and then across the garden. Emily
  examined with her eye the doors and passages as they proceeded, and looked
  on all sides with fearful suspicion; but every thing was as vacant and still
  as she herself could have wished. Grimes opened a back-door of the garden
  already unlocked, that led into an unfrequented lane. There stood two horses
  ready equipped for the journey, and fastened by their bridles to a post not
  six yards distant from the garden. Grimes pushed the door after them.
"By Gemini," said he, "my heart was in my mouth. As I comed along to you,
  I saw Mun, coachey, pop along from the back-door to the stables. He was
  within a hop, step, and jump of me. But he had a lanthorn in his hand, and
  he did not see me, being as I was darkling." Saying this, he assisted Miss
  Melville to mount. He troubled her little during the route; on the contrary,
  he was remarkably silent and contemplative, a circumstance by no means
  disagreeable to Emily, to whom his conversation had never been
  acceptable.
After having proceeded about two miles, they turned into a wood, through
  which the road led to the place of their destination. The night was
  extremely dark, at the same time that the air was soft and mild, it being
  now the middle of summer. Under pretence of exploring the way, Grimes
  contrived, when they had already penetrated into the midst of this gloomy
  solitude, to get his horse abreast with that of Miss Melville, and then,
  suddenly reaching out his hand, seized hold of her bridle. "I think we may
  as well stop here a bit," said he.
"Stop!" exclaimed Emily with surprise; "why should we stop? Mr. Grimes,
  what do you mean?"
"Come, come," said he, "never trouble yourself to wonder. Did you think I
  were such a goose, to take all this trouble merely to gratify your whim? I'
  faith, nobody shall find me a pack-horse, to go of other folks' errands,
  without knowing a reason why. I cannot say that I much minded to have you at
  first; but your ways are enough to stir the blood of my grand-dad.
  Far-fetched and dear-bought is always relishing. Your consent was so hard to
  gain, that squire thought it was surest asking in the dark. A' said however,
  a' would have no such doings in his house, and so, do ye see, we are comed
  here."
"For God's sake, Mr. Grimes, think what you are about! You cannot be base
  enough to ruin a poor creature who has put herself under your
  protection!
"Ruin! No, no, I will make an honest woman of you, when all is done. Nay,
  none of your airs; no tricks upon travellers! I have you here as safe AS a
  horse in a pound; there is not a house nor a shed within a mile of us; and,
  if I miss the opportunity, call me spade. Faith, you are a delicate morsel,
  and there is no time to be lost!"
Miss Melville had but an instant in which to collect her thoughts. She
  felt that there was little hope of softening the obstinate and insensible
  brute in whose power she was placed. But the presence of mind and
  intrepidity annexed to her character did not now desert her. Grimes had
  scarcely finished his harangue, when, with a strong and unexpected jerk, she
  disengaged the bridle from his grasp, and at the same time put her horse
  upon full speed. She had scarcely advanced twice the length of her horse,
  when Grimes recovered from his surprise, and pursued her, inexpressibly
  mortified at being so easily overreached. The sound of his horse behind
  served but to rouse more completely the mettle of that of Emily; whether by
  accident or sagacity, the animal pursued without a fault the narrow and
  winding way; and the chase continued the whole length of the wood.
At the extremity of this wood there was a gate. The recollection of this
  softened a little the cutting disappointment of Grimes, as he thought
  himself secure of putting an end, by its assistance, to the career of Emily;
  nor was it very probable that any body would appear to interrupt his
  designs, in such a place, and in the dead and silence of the night. By the
  most extraordinary accident, however, they found a man on horseback in wait
  at this gate. "Help, help!" exclaimed the affrighted Emily; "thieves!
  murder! help!" The man was Mr. Falkland. Grimes knew his voice; and
  therefore, though he attempted a sort of sullen resistance, it was feebly
  made. Two other men, whom, by reason of the darkness, he had not at first
  seen, and who were Mr. Falkland's servants, hearing the bustle of the
  rencounter, and alarmed for the safety of their master, rode up; and then
  Grimes, disappointed at the loss of his gratification, and admonished by
  conscious guilt, shrunk from farther parley, and rode off in silence.
It may seem strange that Mr. Falkland should thus a second time have been
  the saviour of Miss Melville, and that under circumstances the most
  unexpected and singular. But in this instance it is easily to be accounted
  for. He had heard of a man who lurked about this wood for robbery or some
  other bad design, and that it was conjectured this man was Hawkins, another
  of the victims of Mr. Tyrrel's rural tyranny, whom I shall immediately have
  occasion to introduce. Mr. Falkland's compassion had already been strongly
  excited in favour of Hawkins; he had in vain endeavoured to find him, and do
  him good; and he easily conceived that, if the conjecture which had been
  made in this instance proved true, he might have it in his power not only to
  do what he had always intended, but further, to save from a perilous offence
  against the laws and society a man who appeared to have strongly imbibed the
  principles of justice and virtue. He took with him two servants, because,
  going with the express design of encountering robbers, if robbers should be
  found, he believed he should be inexcusable if he did not go provided
  against possible accidents. But he had directed them, at the same time that
  they kept within call, to be out of the reach of being seen; and it was only
  the eagerness of their zeal that had brought them up thus early in the
  present encounter.
This new adventure promised something extraordinary. Mr. Falkland did not
  immediately recognise Miss Melville; and the person of Grimes was that of a
  total stranger, whom he did not recollect to have ever seen. But it was easy
  to understand the merits of the case, and the propriety of interfering. The
  resolute manner of Mr. Falkland, conjoined with the dread which Grimes,
  oppressed with a sense of wrong, entertained of the opposition of so
  elevated a personage, speedily put the ravisher to flight. Emily was left
  alone with her deliverer. He found her much more collected and calm, than
  could reasonably have been expected from a person who had been, a moment
  before, in the most alarming situation. She told him of the place to which
  she desired to be conveyed, and he immediately undertook to escort her. As
  they went along, she recovered that state of mind which inclined her to make
  a person to whom she had such repeated obligations, and who was so eminently
  the object of her admiration, acquainted with the events that had recently
  befallen her. Mr. Falkland listened with eagerness and surprise. Though he
  had already known various instances of Mr. Tyrrel's mean jealousy and
  unfeeling tyranny, this surpassed them all; and he could scarcely credit his
  ears while he heard the tale. His brutal neighbour seemed to realise all
  that has been told of the passions of fiends. Miss Melville was obliged to
  repeat, in the course of her tale, her kinsman's rude accusation against
  her, of entertaining a passion for Mr. Falkland; and this she did with the
  most bewitching simplicity and charming confusion. Though this part of the
  tale was a source of real pain to her deliverer, yet it is not to be
  supposed but that the flattering partiality of this unhappy girl increased
  the interest he felt in her welfare, and the indignation he conceived
  against her infernal kinsman.
They arrived without accident at the house of the good lady under whose
  protection Emily desired to place herself. Here Mr. Falkland willingly left
  her as in a place of security. Such conspiracies as that of which she was
  intended to have been the victim, depend for their success upon the person
  against whom they are formed being out of the reach of help; and the moment
  they are detected, they are annihilated. Such reasoning will, no doubt, be
  generally found sufficiently solid; and it appeared to Mr. Falkland
  perfectly applicable to the present case. But he was mistaken.

</div></body></text></TEI>