<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="33">CHAPTER V.
The only rule that I laid down to myself in traversing the forest, was to
  take a direction as opposite as possible to that which led to the scene of
  my late imprisonment. After about two hours walking I arrived at the
  termination of this ruder scene, and reached that part of the country which
  is inclosed and cultivated. Here I sat down by the side of a brook, and,
  pulling out a crust of bread which I had brought away with me, rested and
  refreshed myself. While I continued in this place, I began to ruminate upon
  the plan I should lay down for my future proceedings; and my propensity now
  led me, as it had done in a former instance, to fix upon the capital, which
  I believed, besides its other recommendations, would prove the safest place
  for concealment. During these thoughts I saw a couple of peasants passing at
  a small distance, and enquired of them respecting the London road. By their
  description I understood that the most immediate way would be to repass a
  part of the forest, and that it would be necessary to approach considerably
  nearer to the county-town than I was at the spot which I had at present
  reached. I did not imagine that this could be a circumstance of considerable
  importance. My disguise appeared to be a sufficient security against
  momentary danger; and I therefore took a path, though not the most direct
  one, which led towards the point they suggested.
Some of the occurrences of the day are deserving to be mentioned. As I
  passed along a road which lay in my way for a few miles, I saw a carriage
  advancing in the opposite direction. I debated with myself for a moment,
  whether I should pass it without notice, or should take this occasion, by
  voice or gesture, of making an essay of my trade. This idle disquisition was
  however speedily driven from my mind when I perceived that the carriage was
  Mr. Falkland's. The suddenness of the encounter struck me with terror,
  though perhaps it would have been difficult for calm reflection to have
  discovered any considerable danger. I withdrew from the road, and skulked
  behind a hedge till it should have completely gone by. I was too much
  occupied with my own feelings, to venture to examine whether or no the
  terrible adversary of my peace were in the carriage. I persuaded myself that
  he was. I looked after the equipage, and exclaimed, "There you may see the
  luxurious accommodations and appendages of guilt, and here the forlornness
  that awaits upon innocence!"—I was to blame to imagine that my case
  was singular in that respect. I only mention it to show how the most
  trivial circumstance contributes to embitter the cup to the man of
  adversity. The thought however was a transient one. I had learned this
  lesson from my sufferings, not to indulge in the luxury of discontent. As my
  mind recovered its tranquillity, I began to enquire whether the phenomenon I
  had just seen could have any relation to myself. But though my mind was
  extremely inquisitive and versatile in this respect, I could discover no
  sufficient ground upon which to build a judgment.
At night I entered a little public-house at the extremity of a village,
  and, seating myself in a corner of the kitchen, asked for some bread and
  cheese. While I was sitting at my repast, three or four labourers came in
  for a little refreshment after their work. Ideas respecting the inequality
  of rank pervade every order in society; and, as my appearance was meaner and
  more contemptible than theirs, I found it expedient to give way to these
  gentry of a village alehouse, and remove to an obscurer station. I was
  surprised, and not a little startled, to find them fall almost immediately
  into conversation about my history, whom, with a slight variation of
  circumstances, they styled the notorious housebreaker, Kit Williams.
"Damn the fellow," said one of them, "one never hears of any thing else.
  O' my life, I think he makes talk for the whole country."
"That is very true," replied another. "I was at the market-town to-day to
  sell some oats for my master, and there was a hue and cry, some of them
  thought they had got him, but it was a false alarm."
"That hundred guineas is a fine thing," rejoined the first. "I should be
  glad if so be as how it fell in my way."
"For the matter of that," said his companion, "I should like a hundred
  guineas as well as another. But I cannot be of your mind for all that. I
  should never think money would do me any good that had been the means of
  bringing a Christian creature to the gallows."
"Poh, that is all my granny! Some folks must be hanged, to keep the
  wheels of our state-folks a-going. Besides, I could forgive the fellow all
  his other robberies, but that he should have been so hardened as to break
  the house of his own master at last, that is too bad."
"Lord! lord!" replied the other, "I see you know nothing of the matter! I
  will tell you how it was, as I learned it at the town. I question whether he
  ever robbed his master at all. But, hark you! you must know as how that
  squire Falkland was once tried for murder"—
"Yes, yes, we know that."
"Well, he was as innocent as the child unborn. But I supposes as how he
  is a little soft or so. And so Kit Williams—Kit is a devilish cunning
  fellow, you may judge that from his breaking prison no less than five
  times,—so, I say, he threatened to bring his master to trial at 'size
  all over again, and so frightened him, and got money from him at divers
  times. Till at last one squire Forester, a relation of t'other, found it all
  out. And he made the hell of a rumpus, and sent away Kit to prison in a
  twinky; and I believe he would have been hanged: for when two squires lay
  their heads together, they do not much matter law, you know; or else they
  twist the law to their own ends, I cannot exactly say which; but it is much
  at one when the poor fellow's breath is out of his body."
Though this story was very circumstantially told, and with a sufficient
  detail of particulars, it did not pass unquestioned. Each man maintained the
  justness of his own statement, and the dispute was long and obstinately
  pursued. Historians and commentators at length withdrew together. The
  terrors with which I was seized when this conversation began, were extreme.
  I stole a sidelong glance to one quarter and another, to observe if any
  man's attention was turned upon me. I trembled as if in an ague-fit; and, at
  first, felt continual impulses to quit the house, and take to my heels. I
  drew closer to my corner, held aside my head, and seemed from time to time
  to undergo a total revolution of the animal economy.
At length the tide of ideas turned. Perceiving they paid no attention to
  me, the recollection of the full security my disguise afforded recurred
  strongly to my thoughts; and I began inwardly to exult, though I did not
  venture to obtrude myself to examination. By degrees I began to be amused at
  the absurdity of their tales, and the variety of the falsehoods I heard
  asserted around me. My soul seemed to expand; I felt a pride in the
  self-possession and lightness of heart with which I could listen to the
  scene; and I determined to prolong and heighten the enjoyment. Accordingly,
  when they were withdrawn, I addressed myself to our hostess, a buxom, bluff,
  good-humoured widow, and asked what sort of a man this Kit Williams might
  be? She replied that, as she was informed, he was as handsome, likely a lad,
  as any in four counties round; and that she loved him for his cleverness, by
  which he outwitted all the keepers they could set over him, and made his way
  through stone walls as if they were so many cobwebs. I observed, that the
  country was so thoroughly alarmed, that I did not think it possible he
  should escape the pursuit that was set up after him. This idea excited her
  immediate indignation: she said, she hoped he was far enough away by this
  time; but if not, she wished the curse of God might light on them that
  betrayed so noble a fellow to an ignominious end!--Though she little thought
  that the person of whom she spoke was so near her, yet the sincere and
  generous warmth with which She interested herself in my behalf gave me
  considerable pleasure. With this sensation to sweeten the fatigues of the
  day and the calamities of my situation, I retired from the kitchen to a
  neighbouring barn, laid myself down upon some straw, and fell into a
  profound sleep.
The next day about noon, as I was pursuing my journey, I was overtaken by
  two men on horseback, who stopped me, to enquire respecting a person that
  they supposed might have passed along that road. As they proceeded in their
  description, I perceived, with astonishment and terror, that I was myself
  the person to whom their questions related. They entered into a tolerably
  accurate detail of the various characteristics by which my person might best
  be distinguished. They said, they had good reason to believe that I had been
  seen at a place in that county the very day before. While they were speaking
  a third person, who had fallen behind, came up; and my alarm was greatly
  increased upon seeing that this person was the servant of Mr. Forester, who
  had visited me in prison about a fortnight before my escape. My best
  resource in this crisis was composure and apparent indifference. It was
  fortunate for me that my disguise was so complete, that the eye of Mr.
  Falkland itself could scarcely have penetrated it. I had been aware for some
  time before that this was a refuge which events might make necessary, and
  had endeavoured to arrange and methodise my ideas upon the subject. From my
  youth I had possessed a considerable facility in the art of imitation; and
  when I quitted my retreat in the habitation of Mr. Raymond, I adopted, along
  with my beggar's attire, a peculiar slouching and clownish gait, to be used
  whenever there should appear the least chance of my being observed, together
  with an Irish brogue which I had had an opportunity of studying in my
  prison. Such are the miserable expedients, and so great the studied
  artifice, which man, who never deserves the name of manhood but in
  proportion as he is erect and independent, may find it necessary to employ,
  for the purpose of eluding the inexorable animosity and unfeeling tyranny of
  his fellow man! I had made use of this brogue, though I have not thought it
  necessary to write it down in my narrative, in the conversation of the
  village alehouse. Mr. Forester's servant, as he came up, observed that his
  companions were engaged in conversation with me; and, guessing at the
  subject, asked whether they had gained any intelligence. He added to the
  information at which they had already hinted, that a resolution was taken to
  spare neither diligence nor expense for my discovery and apprehension, and
  that they were satisfied, if I were above ground and in the kingdom, it
  would be impossible for me to escape them.
Every new incident that had occurred to me tended to impress upon my mind
  the extreme danger to which I was exposed. I could almost have imagined that
  I was the sole subject of general attention, and that the whole world was in
  arms to exterminate me. The very idea tingled through every fibre of my
  frame. But, terrible as it appeared to my imagination, it did but give new
  energy to my purpose; and I determined that I would not voluntarily resign
  the field, that is, literally speaking, my neck to the cord of the
  executioner, notwithstanding the greatest superiority in my assailants. But
  the incidents which had befallen me, though they did not change my purpose,
  induced me to examine over again the means by which it might be effected.
  The consequence of this revisal was, to determine me to bend my course to
  the nearest sea-port on the west side of the island, and transport myself to
  Ireland. I cannot now tell what it was that inclined me to prefer this
  scheme to that which I had originally formed. Perhaps the latter, which had
  been for some time present to my imagination, for that reason appeared the
  more obvious of the two; and I found an appearance of complexity, which the
  mind did not stay to explain, in substituting the other in its stead.
I arrived without further impediment at the place from which I intended
  to sail, enquired for a vessel, which I found ready to put to sea in a few
  hours, and agreed with the captain for my passage. Ireland had to me the
  disadvantage of being a dependency of the British government, and therefore
  a place of less security than most other countries which are divided from it
  by the ocean. To judge from the diligence with which I seemed to be pursued
  in England, it was not improbable that the zeal of my persecutors might
  follow me to the other side of the channel. It was however sufficiently
  agreeable to my mind, that I was upon the point of being removed one step
  further from the danger which was so grievous to my imagination.
Could there be any peril in the short interval that was to elapse, before
  the vessel was to weigh anchor and quit the English shore? Probably not. A
  very short time had intervened between my determination for the sea and my
  arrival at this place; and if any new alarm had been given to my
  prosecutors, it proceeded from the old woman a very few days before. I hoped
  I had anticipated their diligence. Meanwhile, that I might neglect no
  reasonable precaution, I went instantly on board, resolved that I would not
  unnecessarily, by walking the streets of the town, expose myself to any
  untoward accident. This was the first time I had, upon any occasion, taken
  leave of my native country.

</div></body></text></TEI>