<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="17">CHAPTER IV.
Is it not unaccountable that, in the midst of all my increased veneration
  for my patron, the first tumult of my emotion was scarcely subsided, before
  the old question that had excited my conjectures recurred to my mind, Was he
  the murderer? It was a kind of fatal impulse, that seemed destined to hurry
  me to my destruction. I did not wonder at the disturbance that was given to
  Mr. Falkland by any allusion, however distant, to this fatal affair. That
  was as completely accounted for from the consideration of his excessive
  sensibility in matters of honour, as it would have been upon the supposition
  of the most atrocious guilt. Knowing, as he did, that such a charge had once
  been connected with his name, he would of course be perpetually uneasy, and
  suspect some latent insinuation at every possible opportunity. He would
  doubt and fear, lest every man with whom he conversed harboured the foulest
  suspicion against him. In my case he found that I was in possession of some
  information, more than he was aware of, without its being possible for him
  to decide to what it amounted, whether I had heard a just or unjust, a
  candid or calumniatory tale. He had also reason to suppose that I gave
  entertainment to thoughts derogatory to his honour, and that I did not form
  that favourable judgment, which the exquisite refinement of his ruling
  passion made indispensable to his peace. All these considerations would of
  course maintain in him a state of perpetual uneasiness. But, though I could
  find nothing that I could consider as justifying me in persisting in the
  shadow of a doubt, yet, as I have said, the uncertainty and restlessness of
  my contemplations would by no means depart from me.
The fluctuating state of my mind produced a contention of opposite
  principles, that by turns usurped dominion over my conduct. Sometimes I was
  influenced by the most complete veneration for my master; I placed an
  unreserved confidence in his integrity and his virtue, and implicitly
  surrendered my understanding for him to set it to what point he pleased. At
  other times the confidence, which had before flowed with the most plenteous
  tide, began to ebb; I was, as I had already been, watchful, inquisitive,
  suspicious, full of a thousand conjectures as to the meaning of the most
  indifferent actions. Mr. Falkland, who was most painfully alive to every
  thing that related to his honour, saw these variations, and betrayed his
  consciousness of them now in one manner, and now in another, frequently
  before I was myself aware, sometimes almost before they existed. The
  situation of both was distressing; we were each of us a plague to the other;
  and I often wondered, that the forbearance and benignity of my master was
  not at length exhausted, and that he did not determine to thrust from him
  for ever so incessant an observer. There was indeed one eminent difference
  between his share in the transaction and mine. I had some consolation in the
  midst of my restlessness. Curiosity is a principle that carries its
  pleasures, as well as its pains, along with it. The mind is urged by a
  perpetual stimulus; it seems as if it were continually approaching to the
  end of its race; and as the insatiable desire of satisfaction is its
  principle of conduct, so it promises itself in that satisfaction an unknown
  gratification, which seems as if it were capable of fully compensating any
  injuries that may be suffered in the career. But to Mr. Falkland there was
  no consolation. What he endured in the intercourse between us appeared to be
  gratuitous evil. He had only to wish that there was no such person as myself
  in the world, and to curse the hour when his humanity led him to rescue me
  from my obscurity, and place me in his service.
A consequence produced upon me by the extraordinary nature of my
  situation it is necessary to mention. The constant state of vigilance and
  suspicion in which my mind was retained, worked a very rapid change in my
  character. It seemed to have all the effect that might have been expected
  from years of observation and experience. The strictness with which I
  endeavoured to remark what passed in the mind of one man, and the variety of
  conjectures into which I was led, appeared, as it were, to render me a
  competent adept in the different modes in which the human intellect displays
  its secret workings. I no longer said to myself, as I had done in the
  beginning, "I will ask Mr. Falkland whether he were the murderer." On the
  contrary, after having carefully examined the different kinds of evidence of
  which the subject was susceptible, and recollecting all that had already
  passed upon the subject, it was not without considerable pain, that I felt
  myself unable to discover any way in which I could be perfectly and
  unalterably satisfied of my patron's innocence. As to his guilt, I could
  scarcely bring myself to doubt that in some way or other, sooner or later, I
  should arrive at the knowledge of that, if it really existed. But I could
  not endure to think, almost for a moment, of that side of the alternative as
  true; and with all my ungovernable suspicion arising from the mysteriousness
  of the circumstances, and all the delight which a young and unfledged mind
  receives from ideas that give scope to all that imagination can picture of
  terrible or sublime, I could not yet bring myself to consider Mr. Falkland's
  guilt as a supposition attended with the remotest probability.
I hope the reader will forgive me for dwelling thus long on preliminary
  circumstances. I shall come soon enough to the story of my own misery. I
  have already said, that one of the motives which induced me to the penning
  of this narrative, was to console myself in my insupportable distress. I
  derive a melancholy pleasure from dwelling upon the circumstances which
  imperceptibly paved the way to my ruin. While I recollect or describe past
  scenes, which occurred in a more favourable period of my life, my attention
  is called off for a short interval, from the hopeless misfortune in which I
  am at present involved. The man must indeed possess an uncommon portion of
  hardness of heart, who can envy me so slight a relief.—To proceed.
For some time after the explanation which had thus taken place between me
  and Mr. Falkland, his melancholy, instead of being in the slightest degree
  diminished by the lenient hand of time, went on perpetually to increase. His
  fits of insanity—for such I must denominate them for want of a
  distinct appellation, though it is possible they might not fall under the
  definition that either the faculty or the court of chancery appropriate to
  the term—became stronger and more durable than ever. It was no longer
  practicable wholly to conceal them from the family, and even from the
  neighbourhood. He would sometimes, without any previous notice, absent
  himself from his house for two or three days, unaccompanied by servant or
  attendant. This was the more extraordinary, as it was well known that he
  paid no visits, nor kept up any sort of intercourse with the gentlemen of
  the vicinity. But it was impossible that a man of Mr. Falkland's distinction
  and fortune should long continue in such a practice, without its being
  discovered what was become of him; though a considerable part of our county
  was among the wildest and most desolate districts that are to be found in
  South Britain. Mr. Falkland was sometimes seen climbing among the rocks,
  reclining motionless for hours together upon the edge of a precipice, or
  lulled into a kind of nameless lethargy of despair by the dashing of the
  torrents. He would remain for whole nights together under the naked cope of
  heaven, inattentive to the consideration either of place or time; insensible
  to the variations of the weather, or rather seeming to be delighted with
  that uproar of the elements, which partially called off his attention from
  the discord and dejection that occupied his own mind.
At first, when we received intelligence at any time of the place to which
  Mr. Falkland had withdrawn himself, some person of his household, Mr.
  Collins or myself, but most generally myself, as I was always at home, and
  always, in the received sense of the word, at leisure, went to him to
  persuade him to return. But, after a few experiments, we thought it
  advisable to desist, and leave him to prolong his absence, or to terminate
  it, as might happen to suit his own inclination. Mr. Collins, whose grey
  hairs and long services seemed to give him a sort of right to be
  importunate, sometimes succeeded; though even in that case there was nothing
  that could sit more uneasily upon Mr. Falkland than this insinuation as if
  he wanted a guardian to take care of him, or as if he were in, or in danger
  of falling into, a state in which he would be incapable of deliberately
  controlling his own words and actions. At one time he would suddenly yield
  to his humble, venerable friend, murmuring grievously at the constraint that
  was put upon him, but without spirit enough even to complain of it with
  energy. At another time, even though complying, he would suddenly burst out
  in a paroxysm of resentment. Upon these occasions there was something
  inconceivably, savagely terrible in his anger, that gave to the person
  against whom it was directed the most humiliating and insupportable
  sensations. Me he always treated, at these times, with fierceness, and drove
  me from him with a vehemence lofty, emphatical, and sustained, beyond any
  thing of which I should have thought human nature to be capable. These
  sallies seemed always to constitute a sort of crisis in his indisposition;
  and, whenever he was induced to such a premature return, he would fall
  immediately after into a state of the most melancholy inactivity, in which
  he usually continued for two or three days. It was by an obstinate fatality
  that, whenever I saw Mr. Falkland in these deplorable situations, and
  particularly when I lighted upon him after having sought him among the rocks
  and precipices, pale, emaciated, solitary, and haggard, the suggestion would
  continually recur to me, in spite of inclination, in spite of persuasion,
  and in spite of evidence, Surely this man is a murderer!

</div></body></text></TEI>