<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="5">CHAPTER V.
It was not long after that a malignant distemper broke out in the
  neighbourhood, which proved fatal to many of the inhabitants, and was of
  unexampled rapidity in its effects. One of the first persons that was seized
  with it was Mr. Clare. It may be conceived, what grief and alarm this
  incident spread through the vicinity. Mr. Clare was considered by them as
  something more than mortal. The equanimity of his behaviour, his unassuming
  carriage, his exuberant benevolence and goodness of heart, joined with his
  talents, his inoffensive wit, and the comprehensiveness of his intelligence,
  made him the idol of all that knew him. In the scene of his rural retreat,
  at least, he had no enemy. All mourned the danger that now threatened him.
  He appeared to have had the prospect of long life, and of going down to his
  grave full of years and of honour. Perhaps these appearances were deceitful.
  Perhaps the intellectual efforts he had made, which were occasionally more
  sudden, violent, and unintermitted, than a strict regard to health would
  have dictated, had laid the seed of future disease. But a sanguine observer
  would infallibly have predicted, that his temperate habits, activity of
  mind, and unabated cheerfulness, would be able even to keep death at bay for
  a time, and baffle the attacks of distemper, provided their approach were
  not uncommonly rapid and violent. The general affliction, therefore, was
  doubly pungent upon the present occasion.
But no one was so much affected as Mr. Falkland. Perhaps no man so well
  understood the value of the life that was now at stake. He immediately
  hastened to the spot; but he found some difficulty in gaining admission. Mr.
  Clare, aware of the infectious nature of his disease, had given directions
  that as few persons as possible should approach him. Mr. Falkland sent up
  his name. He was told that he was included in the general orders. He was
  not, however, of a temper to be easily repulsed; he persisted with
  obstinacy, and at length carried his point, being only reminded in the first
  instance to employ those precautions which experience has proved most
  effectual for counteracting infection.
He found Mr. Clare in his bed-chamber, but not in bed. He was sitting in
  his night-gown at a bureau near the window. His appearance was composed and
  cheerful, but death was in his countenance. "I had a great inclination,
  Falkland," said he, "not to have suffered you to come in; and yet there is
  not a person in the world it could give me more pleasure to see. But, upon
  second thoughts, I believe there are few people that could run into a danger
  of this kind with a better prospect of escaping. In your case, at least, the
  garrison will not, I trust, be taken through the treachery of the commander.
  I cannot tell how it is that I, who can preach wisdom to you, have myself
  been caught. But do not be discouraged by my example. I had no notice of my
  danger, or I would have acquitted myself better."
Mr. Falkland having once established himself in the apartment of his
  friend, would upon no terms consent to retire. Mr. Clare considered that
  there was perhaps less danger in this choice, than in the frequent change
  from the extremes of a pure to a tainted air, and desisted from
  expostulation. "Falkland," said he, "when you came in, I had just finished
  making my will. I was not pleased with what I had formerly drawn up upon
  that subject, and I did not choose in my present situation to call in an
  attorney. In fact, it would be strange if a man of sense, with pure and
  direct intentions, should not be able to perform such a function for
  himself."
Mr. Clare continued to act in the same easy and disengaged manner as in
  perfect health. To judge from the cheerfulness of his tone and the firmness
  of his manner, the thought would never once have occurred that he was dying.
  He walked, he reasoned, he jested, in a way that argued the most perfect
  self-possession. But his appearance changed perceptibly for the worse every
  quarter of an hour. Mr. Falkland kept his eye perpetually fixed upon him,
  with mingled sentiments of anxiety and admiration.
"Falkland," said he, after having appeared for a short period absorbed in
  thought, "I feel that I am dying. This is a strange distemper of mine.
  Yesterday I seemed in perfect health, and to-morrow I shall be an insensible
  corpse. How curious is the line that separates life and death to mortal men!
  To be at one moment active, gay, penetrating, with stores of knowledge at
  one's command, capable of delighting, instructing, and animating mankind,
  and the next, lifeless and loathsome, an incumbrance upon the face of the
  earth! Such is the history of many men, and such will be mine.
"I feel as if I had yet much to do in the world; but it will not be. I
  must be contented with what is past. It is in vain that I muster all my
  spirits to my heart. The enemy is too mighty and too merciless for me; he
  will not give me time so much as to breathe. These things are not yet at
  least in our power: they are parts of a great series that is perpetually
  flowing. The general welfare, the great business of the universe, will go
  on, though I bear no further share in promoting it. That task is reserved
  for younger strengths, for you, Falkland, and such as you. We should be
  contemptible indeed if the prospect of human improvement did not yield us a
  pure and perfect delight, independently of the question of our existing to
  partake of it. Mankind would have little to envy to future ages, if they had
  all enjoyed a serenity as perfect as mine has been for the latter half of my
  existence."
Mr. Clare sat up through the whole day, indulging himself in easy and
  cheerful exertions, which were perhaps better calculated to refresh and
  invigorate the frame, than if he had sought repose in its direct form. Now
  and then he was visited with a sudden pang; but it was no sooner felt, than
  he seemed to rise above it, and smiled at the impotence of these attacks.
  They might destroy him, but they could not disturb. Three or four times he
  was bedewed with profuse sweats; and these again were succeeded by an
  extreme dryness and burning heat of the skin. He was next covered with small
  livid spots: symptoms of shivering followed, but these he drove away with a
  determined resolution. He then became tranquil and composed, and, after some
  time, decided to go to bed, it being already night. "Falkland," said he,
  pressing his hand, "the task of dying is not so difficult as some imagine.
  When one looks back from the brink of it, one wonders that so total a
  subversion can take place at so easy a price."
He had now been some time in bed, and, as every thing was still, Mr.
  Falkland hoped that he slept; but in that he was mistaken. Presently Mr.
  Clare threw back the curtain, and looked in the countenance of his friend.
  "I cannot sleep," said he. "No, if I could sleep, it would be the same thing
  as to recover; and I am destined to have the worst in this battle.
"Falkland, I have been thinking about you. I do not know any one whose
  future usefulness I contemplate with greater hope. Take care of yourself. Do
  not let the world be defrauded of your virtues. I am acquainted with your
  weakness as well as your strength. You have an impetuosity, and an
  impatience of imagined dishonour, that, if once set wrong, may make you as
  eminently mischievous as you will otherwise be useful. Think seriously of
  exterminating this error!
"But if I cannot, in the brief expostulation my present situation will
  allow, produce this desirable change in you, there is at least one thing I
  can do. I can put you upon your guard against a mischief I foresee to be
  imminent. Beware of Mr. Tyrrel. Do not commit the mistake of despising him
  as an unequal opponent. Petty causes may produce great mischiefs. Mr. Tyrrel
  is boisterous, rugged, and unfeeling; and you are too passionate, too
  acutely sensible of injury. It would be truly to be lamented, if a man so
  inferior, so utterly unworthy to be compared with you, should be capable of
  changing your whole history into misery and guilt. I have a painful
  presentiment upon my heart, as if something dreadful would reach you from
  that quarter. Think of this. I exact no promise from you. I would not
  shackle you with the fetters of superstition; I would have you governed by
  justice and reason."
Mr. Falkland was deeply affected with this expostulation. His sense of
  the generous attention of Mr. Clare at such a moment, was so great as almost
  to deprive him of utterance. He spoke in short sentences, and with visible
  effort. "I will behave better," replied he. "Never fear me! Your admonitions
  shall not be thrown away upon me."
Mr. Clare adverted to another subject. "I have made you my executor; you
  will not refuse me this last office of friendship. It is but a short time
  that I have had the happiness of knowing you; but in that short time I have
  examined you well, and seen you thoroughly. Do not disappoint the sanguine
  hope I have entertained!
"I have left some legacies. My former connections, while I lived amidst
  the busy haunts of men, as many of them as were intimate, are all of them
  dear to me. I have not had time to summon them about me upon the present
  occasion, nor did I desire it. The remembrances of me will, I hope, answer a
  better purpose than such as are usually thought of on similar
  occasions."
Mr. Clare, having thus unburthened his mind, spoke no more for several
  hours. Towards morning Mr. Falkland quietly withdrew the curtain, and looked
  at the dying man. His eyes were open, and were now gently turned towards his
  young friend. His countenance was sunk, and of a death-like appearance. "I
  hope you are better," said Falkland in a half whisper, as if afraid of
  disturbing him. Mr. Clare drew his hand from the bed-clothes, and stretched
  it forward; Mr. Falkland advanced, and took hold of it. "Much better," said
  Mr. Clare, in a voice inward and hardly articulate; "the struggle is now
  over; I have finished my part; farewell! remember!" These were his last
  words. He lived still a few hours; his lips were sometimes seen to move; he
  expired without a groan.
Mr. Falkland had witnessed the scene with much anxiety. His hopes of a
  favourable crisis, and his fear of disturbing the last moments of his
  friend, had held him dumb. For the last half hour he had stood up, with his
  eyes intently fixed upon Mr. Clare. He witnessed the last gasp, the last
  little convulsive motion of the frame. He continued to look; he sometimes
  imagined that he saw life renewed. At length he could deceive himself no
  longer, and exclaimed with a distracted accent, "And is this all?" He would
  have thrown himself upon the body of his friend; the attendants withheld,
  and would have forced him into another apartment. But he struggled from
  them, and hung fondly over the bed. "Is this the end of genius, virtue, and
  excellence? Is the luminary of the world thus for ever gone? Oh, yesterday!
  yesterday! Clare, why could not I have died in your stead? Dreadful moment!
  Irreparable loss! Lost in the very maturity and vigour of his mind! Cut off
  from a usefulness ten thousand times greater than any he had already
  exhibited! Oh, his was a mind to have instructed sages, and guided the moral
  world! This is all we have left of him! The eloquence of those lips is gone!
  The incessant activity of that heart is still! The best and wisest of men is
  gone, and the world is insensible of its loss!"
Mr. Tyrrel heard the intelligence of Mr. Clare's death with emotion, but
  of a different kind. He avowed that he had not forgiven him his partial
  attachment to Mr. Falkland, and therefore could not recall his remembrance
  with kindness. But if he could have overlooked his past injustice,
  sufficient care, it seems, was taken to keep alive his resentment.
  "Falkland, forsooth, attended him on his death-bed, as if nobody else were
  worthy of his confidential communications." But what was worst of all was
  this executorship. "In every thing this pragmatical rascal throws me behind.
  Contemptible wretch, that has nothing of the man about him! Must he
  perpetually trample upon his betters? Is every body incapable of saying what
  kind of stuff a man is made of? caught with mere outside? choosing the
  flimsy before the substantial? And upon his death-bed too? [Mr. Tyrrel with
  his uncultivated brutality mixed, as usually happens, certain rude notions
  of religion.] Sure the sense of his situation might have shamed him. Poor
  wretch! his soul has a great deal to answer for. He has made my pillow
  uneasy; and, whatever may be the consequences, it is he we have to thank for
  them."
The death of Mr. Clare removed the person who could most effectually have
  moderated the animosities of the contending parties, and took away the great
  operative check upon the excesses of Mr. Tyrrel. This rustic tyrant had been
  held in involuntary restraint by the intellectual ascendancy of his
  celebrated neighbour: and, notwithstanding the general ferocity of his
  temper, he did not appear till lately to have entertained a hatred against
  him. In the short time that had elapsed from the period in which Mr. Clare
  had fixed his residence in the neighbourhood, to that of the arrival of Mr.
  Falkland from the Continent, the conduct of Mr. Tyrrel had even shown tokens
  of improvement. He would indeed have been better satisfied not to have had
  even this intruder into a circle where he had been accustomed to reign. But
  with Mr. Clare he could have no rivalship; the venerable character of Mr.
  Clare disposed him to submission: this great man seemed to have survived all
  the acrimony of contention, and all the jealous subtleties of a mistaken
  honour.
The effects of Mr. Clare's suavity however, so far as related to Mr.
  Tyrrel, had been in a certain degree suspended by considerations of
  rivalship between this gentleman and Mr. Falkland. And, now that the
  influence of Mr. Clare's presence and virtues was entirely removed, Mr.
  Tyrrel's temper broke out into more criminal excesses than ever. The added
  gloom which Mr. Falkland's neighbourhood inspired, overflowed upon all his
  connections; and the new examples of his sullenness and tyranny which every
  day afforded, reflected back upon this accumulated and portentous feud.

</div></body></text></TEI>