<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="4">CHAPTER IV.
This was only one out of innumerable instances, that every day seemed to
  multiply, of petty mortifications which Mr. Tyrrel was destined to endure on
  the part of Mr. Falkland. In all of them Mr. Falkland conducted himself with
  such unaffected propriety, as perpetually to add to the stock of his
  reputation. The more Mr. Tyrrel struggled with his misfortune, the more
  conspicuous and inveterate it became. A thousand times he cursed his stars,
  which took, as he apprehended, a malicious pleasure in making Mr. Falkland,
  at every turn, the instrument of his humiliation. Smarting under a
  succession of untoward events, he appeared to feel, in the most exquisite
  manner, the distinctions paid to his adversary, even in those points in
  which he had not the slightest pretensions. An instance of this now
  occurred.
Mr. Clare, a poet whose works have done immortal honour to the country
  that produced him, had lately retired, after a life spent in the sublimest
  efforts of genius, to enjoy the produce of his economy, and the reputation
  he had acquired, in this very neighbourhood. Such an inmate was looked up to
  by the country gentlemen with a degree of adoration. They felt a conscious
  pride in recollecting that the boast of England was a native of their
  vicinity; and they were by no means deficient in gratitude when they saw
  him, who had left them an adventurer, return into the midst of them, in the
  close of his days, crowned with honours and opulence. The reader is
  acquainted with his works: he has, probably, dwelt upon them with transport;
  and I need not remind him of their excellence: but he is, perhaps, a
  stranger to his personal qualifications; he does not know that his
  productions were scarcely more admirable than his conversation. In company
  he seemed to be the only person ignorant of the greatness of his fame. To
  the world his writings will long remain a kind of specimen of what the human
  mind is capable of performing; but no man perceived their defects so acutely
  as he, or saw so distinctly how much yet remained to be effected: he alone
  appeared to look upon his works with superiority and indifference. One of
  the features that most eminently distinguished him was a perpetual suavity
  of manners, a comprehensiveness of mind, that regarded the errors of others
  without a particle of resentment, and made it impossible for any one to be
  his enemy. He pointed out to men their mistakes with frankness and
  unreserve, his remonstrances produced astonishment and conviction, but
  without uneasiness, in the party to whom they were addressed: they felt the
  instrument that was employed to correct their irregularities, but it never
  mangled what it was intended to heal. Such were the moral qualities that
  distinguished him among his acquaintance. The intellectual accomplishments
  he exhibited were, principally, a tranquil and mild enthusiasm, and a
  richness of conception which dictated spontaneously to his tongue, and
  flowed with so much ease, that it was only by retrospect you could be made
  aware of the amazing variety of ideas that had been presented.
Mr. Clare certainly found few men in this remote situation that were
  capable of participating in his ideas and amusements. It has been among the
  weaknesses of great men to fly to solitude, and converse with woods and
  groves, rather than with a circle of strong and comprehensive minds like
  their own. From the moment of Mr. Falkland's arrival in the neighbourhood,
  Mr. Clare distinguished him in the most flattering manner. To so penetrating
  a genius there was no need of long experience and patient observation to
  discover the merits and defects of any character that presented itself. The
  materials of his judgment had long since been accumulated; and, at the close
  of so illustrious a life, he might almost be said to see through nature at a
  glance. What wonder that he took some interest in a mind in a certain degree
  congenial with his own? But to Mr. Tyrrel's diseased imagination, every
  distinction bestowed on his neighbour seemed to be expressly intended as an
  insult to him. On the other hand, Mr. Clare, though gentle and benevolent in
  his remonstrances to a degree that made the taking offence impossible, was
  by no means parsimonious of praise, or slow to make use of the deference
  that was paid him, for the purpose of procuring justice to merit.
It happened at one of those public meetings at which Mr. Falkland and Mr.
  Tyrrel were present, that the conversation, in one of the most numerous sets
  into which the company was broken, turned upon the poetical talents of the
  former. A lady, who was present, and was distinguished for the acuteness of
  her understanding, said, she had been favoured with a sight of a poem he had
  just written, entitled An Ode to the Genius of Chivalry, which
  appeared to her of exquisite merit. The curiosity of the company was
  immediately excited, and the lady added, she had a copy in her pocket, which
  was much at their service, provided its being thus produced would not be
  disagreeable to the author. The whole circle immediately entreated Mr.
  Falkland to comply with their wishes, and Mr. Clare, who was one of the
  company, enforced their petition. Nothing gave this gentleman so much
  pleasure as to have an opportunity of witnessing and doing justice to the
  exhibition of intellectual excellence. Mr. Falkland had no false modesty or
  affectation, and therefore readily yielded his consent.
Mr. Tyrrel accidentally sat at the extremity of this circle. It cannot be
  supposed that the turn the conversation had taken was by any means agreeable
  to him. He appeared to wish to withdraw himself, but there seemed to be some
  unknown power that, as it were by enchantment, retained him in his place,
  and made him consent to drink to the dregs the bitter potion which envy had
  prepared for him.
The poem was read to the rest of the company by Mr. Clare, whose
  elocution was scarcely inferior to his other accomplishments. Simplicity,
  discrimination, and energy constantly attended him in the act of reading,
  and it is not easy to conceive a more refined delight than fell to the lot
  of those who had the good fortune to be his auditors. The beauties of Mr.
  Falkland's poem were accordingly exhibited with every advantage. The
  successive passions of the author were communicated to the hearer. What was
  impetuous, and what was solemn, were delivered with a responsive feeling,
  and a flowing and unlaboured tone. The pictures conjured up by the creative
  fancy of the poet were placed full to view, at one time overwhelming the
  soul with superstitious awe, and at another transporting it with luxuriant
  beauty.
The character of the hearers upon this occasion has already been
  described. They were, for the most part, plain, unlettered, and of little
  refinement. Poetry in general they read, when read at all, from the mere
  force of imitation, and with few sensations of pleasure; but this poem had a
  peculiar vein of glowing inspiration. This very poem would probably have
  been seen by many of them with little effect; but the accents of Mr. Clare
  carried it home to the heart. He ended: and, as the countenances of his
  auditors had before sympathised with the passions of the composition, so now
  they emulated each other in declaring their approbation. Their sensations
  were of a sort to which they were little accustomed. One spoke, and another
  followed by a sort of uncontrollable impulse; and the rude and broken manner
  of their commendations rendered them the more singular and remarkable. But
  what was least to be endured was the behaviour of Mr. Clare. He returned the
  manuscript to the lady from whom he had received it, and then, addressing
  Mr. Falkland, said with emphasis and animation, "Ha! this is as it should
  be. It is of the right stamp. I have seen too many hard essays strained from
  the labour of a pedant, and pastoral ditties distressed in lack of a
  meaning. They are such as you sir, that we want. Do not forget, however,
  that the Muse was not given to add refinements to idleness, but for the
  highest and most invaluable purposes. Act up to the magnitude of your
  destiny."
A moment after, Mr. Clare quitted his seat, and with Mr. Falkland and two
  or three more withdrew. As soon as they were gone, Mr. Tyrrel edged further
  into the circle. He had sat silent so long that he seemed ready to burst
  with gall and indignation. "Mighty pretty verses!" said he, half talking to
  himself, and not addressing any particular person: "why, ay, the verses are
  well enough. Damnation! I should like to know what a ship-load of such stuff
  is good for."
"Why, surely," said the lady who had introduced Mr. Falkland's Ode on the
  present occasion, "you must allow that poetry is an agreeable and elegant
  amusement."
"Elegant, quotha!--Why, look at this Falkland! A puny bit of a thing! In
  the devil's name, madam, do you think he would write poetry if he could do
  any thing better?"
The conversation did not stop here. The lady expostulated. Several other
  persons, fresh from the sensation they had felt, contributed their share.
  Mr. Tyrrel grew more violent in his invectives, and found ease in uttering
  them. The persons who were able in any degree to check his vehemence were
  withdrawn. One speaker after another shrunk back into silence, too timid to
  oppose, or too indolent to contend with, the fierceness of his passion. He
  found the appearance of his old ascendancy; but he felt its deceitfulness
  and uncertainty, and was gloomily dissatisfied.
In his return from this assembly he was accompanied by a young man, whom
  similitude of manners had rendered one of his principal confidents, and
  whose road home was in part the same as his own. One might have thought that
  Mr. Tyrrel had sufficiently vented his spleen in the dialogue he had just
  been holding. But he was unable to dismiss from his recollection the anguish
  he had endured. "Damn Falkland!" said he. "What a pitiful scoundrel is here
  to make all this bustle about! But women and fools always will be fools;
  there is no help for that! Those that set them on have most to answer for;
  and most of all, Mr. Clare. He is a man that ought to know something of the
  world, and past being duped by gewgaws and tinsel. He seemed, too, to have
  some notion of things: I should not have suspected him of hallooing to a cry
  of mongrels without honesty or reason. But the world is all alike. Those
  that seem better than their neighbours, are only more artful. They mean the
  same thing, though they take a different road. He deceived me for a while,
  but it is all out now. They are the makers of the mischief. Fools might
  blunder, but they would not persist, if people that ought to set them right
  did not encourage them to go wrong."
A few days after this adventure Mr. Tyrrel was surprised to receive a
  visit from Mr. Falkland. Mr. Falkland proceeded, without ceremony, to
  explain the motive of his coming.
"Mr. Tyrrel," said he, "I am come to have an amicable explanation with
  you."
"Explanation! What is my offence?"
"None in the world, sir; and for that reason I conceive this the fittest
  time to come to a right understanding."
"You are in a devil of a hurry, sir. Are you clear that this haste will
  not mar, instead of make an understanding?"
"I think I am, sir. I have great faith in the purity of my intentions,
  and I will not doubt, when you perceive the view with which I come, that you
  will willingly co-operate with it."
"Mayhap, Mr. Falkland, we may not agree about that. One man thinks one
  way, and another man thinks another. Mayhap I do not think I have any great
  reason to be pleased with you already."
"It may be so. I cannot, however, charge myself with having given you
  reason to be displeased."
"Well, sir, you have no right to put me out of humour with myself. If you
  come to play upon me, and try what sort of a fellow you shall have to deal
  with, damn me if you shall have any reason to hug yourself upon the
  experiment."
"Nothing, sir, is more easy for us than to quarrel. If you desire that,
  there is no fear that you will find opportunities."
"Damn me, sir, if I do not believe you are come to bully me."
"Mr. Tyrrel! sir—have a care!"
"Of what, sir!--Do you threaten me? Damn my soul! who are you? what do
  you come here for?"
The fieriness of Mr. Tyrrel brought Mr. Falkland to his recollection.
"I am wrong," said he. "I confess it. I came for purposes of peace. With
  that view I have taken the liberty to visit you. Whatever therefore might be
  my feelings upon another occasion, I am bound to suppress them now."
"Ho!--Well, sir: and what have you further to offer?"
"Mr. Tyrrel," proceeded Mr. Falkland, "you will readily imagine that the
  cause that brought me was not a slight one. I would not have troubled you
  with a visit, but for important reasons. My coming is a pledge how deeply I am
  myself impressed with what I have to communicate.
"We are in a critical situation. We are upon the brink of a whirlpool
  which, if once it get hold of us, will render all further deliberation
  impotent. An unfortunate jealousy seems to have insinuated itself between
  us, which I would willingly remove; and I come to ask your assistance. We
  are both of us nice of temper; we are both apt to kindle, and warm of
  resentment. Precaution in this stage can be dishonourable to neither; the
  time may come when we shall wish we had employed it, and find it too late.
  Why should we be enemies? Our tastes are different; our pursuits need not
  interfere. We both of us amply possess the means of happiness; We may be
  respected by all, and spend a long life of tranquillity and enjoyment. Will
  it be wise in us to exchange this prospect for the fruits of strife? A
  strife between persons with our peculiarities and our weaknesses, includes
  consequences that I shudder to think of. I fear, sir, that it is pregnant
  with death at least to one of us, and with misfortune and remorse to the
  survivor."
"Upon my soul, you are a strange man! Why trouble me with your prophecies
  and forebodings?"
"Because it is necessary to your happiness! Because it becomes me to
  tell you of our danger now, rather than wait till my character will allow
  this tranquillity no longer!
"By quarrelling we shall but imitate the great mass of mankind, who could
  easily quarrel in our place. Let us do better. Let us show that we have the
  magnanimity to contemn petty misunderstandings. By thus judging we shall do
  ourselves most substantial honour. By a contrary conduct we shall merely
  present a comedy for the amusement of our acquaintance."
"Do you think so? there may be something in that. Damn me, if I consent
  to be the jest of any man living."
"You are right, Mr. Tyrrel. Let us each act in the manner best calculated
  to excite respect. We neither of us wish to change roads; let us each suffer
  the other to pursue his own track unmolested. Be this our compact; and by
  mutual forbearance let us preserve mutual peace."
Saying this, Mr. Falkland offered his hand to Mr. Tyrrel in token of
  fellowship. But the gesture was too significant. The wayward rustic, who
  seemed to have been somewhat impressed by what had preceded, taken as he now
  was by surprise, shrunk back. Mr. Falkland was again ready to take fire upon
  this new slight, but he checked himself.
"All this is very unaccountable," cried Mr. Tyrrel. "What the devil can
  have made you so forward, if you had not some sly purpose to answer, by
  which I am to be overreached?"
"My purpose," replied Mr. Falkland, "is a manly and an honest purpose.
  Why should you refuse a proposition dictated by reason, and an equal regard
  to the interest of each?"
Mr. Tyrrel had had an opportunity for pause, and fell back into his
  habitual character.
"Well, sir, in all this I must own there is some frankness. Now I will
  return you like for like. It is no matter how I came by it, my temper is
  rough, and will not be controlled. Mayhap you may think it is a weakness,
  but I do not desire to see it altered. Till you came, I found myself very
  well: I liked my neighbours, and my neighbours humoured me. But now the case
  is entirely altered; and, as long as I cannot stir abroad without meeting
  with some mortification in which you are directly or remotely concerned, I
  am determined to hate you. Now, sir, if you will only go out of the county
  or the kingdom, to the devil if you please, so as I may never hear of you
  any more, I will promise never to quarrel with you as long as I live. Your
  rhymes and your rebusses, your quirks and your conundrums, may then be every
  thing that is grand for what I care."
"Mr. Tyrrel, be reasonable! Might not I as well desire you to leave the
  county, as you desire me? I come to you, not as to a master, but an equal.
  In the society of men we must have something to endure, as well as to enjoy.
  No man must think that the world was made for him. Let us take things as we
  find them; and accommodate ourselves as we can to unavoidable
  circumstances."
"True, sir; all this is fine talking. But I return to my text: we are as
  God made us. I am neither a philosopher nor a poet, to set out upon a
  wild-goose chase of making myself a different man from what you find me. As
  for consequences, what must be must be. As we brew we must bake. And so, do
  you see? I shall not trouble myself about what is to be, but stand up to it
  with a stout heart when it comes. Only this I can tell you, that as long as
  I find you thrust into my dish every day I shall hate you as bad as senna
  and valerian. And damn me, if I do not think I hate you the more for coming
  to-day in this pragmatical way, when nobody sent for you, on purpose to show
  how much wiser you are than all the world besides."
"Mr. Tyrrel, I have done. I foresaw consequences, and came as a friend. I
  had hoped that, by mutual explanation, we should have come to a better
  understanding. I am disappointed; but, perhaps, when you coolly reflect on
  what has passed, you will give me credit for my intentions, and think that
  my proposal was not an unreasonable one."
Having said this, Mr. Falkland departed. Through the interview he, no
  doubt, conducted himself in a way that did him peculiar credit. Yet the
  warmth of his temper could not be entirely suppressed: and even when he was
  most exemplary, there was an apparent loftiness in his manner that was
  calculated to irritate; and the very grandeur with which he suppressed his
  passions, operated indirectly as a taunt to his opponent. The interview was
  prompted by the noblest sentiments; but it unquestionably served to widen
  the breach it was intended to heal.
For Mr. Tyrrel, he had recourse to his old expedient, and unburthened the
  tumult of his thoughts to his confidential friend. "This," cried he, "is a
  new artifice of the fellow, to prove his imagined superiority. We knew well
  enough that he had the gift of the gab. To be sure, if the world were to be
  governed by words, he would be in the right box. Oh, yes, he had it all
  hollow! But what signifies prating? Business must be done in another guess
  way than that. I wonder what possessed me that I did not kick him! But that
  is all to come. This is only a new debt added to the score, which he shall
  one day richly pay. This Falkland haunts me like a demon. I cannot wake but
  I think of him. I cannot sleep but I see him. He poisons all my pleasures. I
  should be glad to see him torn with tenter-hooks, and to grind his
  heart-strings with my teeth. I shall know no joy till I see him ruined.
  There may be some things right about him; but he is my perpetual torment.
  The thought of him hangs like a dead weight upon my heart, and I have a
  right to shake it off. Does he think I will feel all that I endure for
  nothing?"
In spite of the acerbity of Mr. Tyrrel's feelings, it is probable,
  however, he did some justice to his rival. He regarded him, indeed, with
  added dislike; but he no longer regarded him as a despicable foe. He avoided
  his encounter; he forbore to treat him with random hostility; he seemed to
  lie in wait for his victim, and to collect his venom for a mortal
  assault.

</div></body></text></TEI>