<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="34">CHAPTER VI.
The time was now nearly elapsed that was prescribed for our stay, and
  orders for weighing anchor were every moment expected, when we were hailed
  by a boat from the shore, with two other men in it besides those that rowed.
  They entered our vessel in an instant. They were officers of justice. The
  passengers, five persons besides myself, were ordered upon deck for
  examination. I was inexpressibly disturbed at the occurrence of such a
  circumstance in so unseasonable a moment. I took it for granted that it was
  of me they were in search. Was it possible that, by any unaccountable
  accident, they should have got an intimation of my disguise? It was
  infinitely more distressing to encounter them upon this narrow stage, and
  under these pointed circumstances, than, as I had before encountered my
  pursuers, under the appearance of an indifferent person. My recollection
  however did not forsake me. I confided in my conscious disguise and my Irish
  brogue, as a rock of dependence against all accidents.
No sooner did we appear upon deck than, to my great consternation, I
  could observe the attention of our guests principally turned upon me. They
  asked a few frivolous questions of such of my fellow passengers as happened
  to be nearest to them; and then, turning to me, enquired my name, who I was,
  whence I came, and what had brought me there? I had scarcely opened my mouth
  to reply, when, with one consent, they laid hold of me, said I was their
  prisoner, and declared that my accent, together with the correspondence of
  my person, would be sufficient to convict me before any court in England. I
  was hurried out of the vessel into the boat in which they came, and seated
  between them, as if by way of precaution, lest I should spring overboard,
  and by any means escape them.
I now took it for granted that I was once more in the power of Mr.
  Falkland; and the idea was insupportably mortifying and oppressive to my
  imagination. Escape from his pursuit, freedom from his tyranny, were objects
  upon which my whole soul was bent. Could no human ingenuity and exertion
  effect them? Did his power reach through all space, and his eye penetrate
  every concealment? Was he like that mysterious being, to protect us from
  whose fierce revenge mountains and hills, we are told, might fall on us in
  vain? No idea is more heart-sickening and tremendous than this. But, in my
  case, it was not a subject of reasoning or of faith; I could derive no
  comfort, either directly from the unbelief which, upon religious subjects,
  some men avow to their own minds; or secretly from the remoteness and
  incomprehensibility of the conception: it was an affair of sense; I felt the
  fangs of the tiger striking deep into my heart.
But though this impression was at first exceedingly strong, and
  accompanied with its usual attendants of dejection and pusillanimity, my
  mind soon began, as it were mechanically, to turn upon the consideration of
  the distance between this sea-port and my county prison, and the various
  opportunities of escape that might offer themselves in the interval. My
  first duty was to avoid betraying myself, more than it might afterwards
  appear I was betrayed already. It was possible that, though apprehended, my
  apprehension might have been determined on upon some slight score, and that,
  by my dexterity, I might render my dismission as sudden as my arrest had
  been. It was even possible that I had been seized through a mistake, and
  that the present measure might have no connection with Mr. Falkland's
  affair. Upon every supposition, it was my business to gain information. In
  my passage from the ship to the town I did not utter a word. My conductors
  commented on my sulkiness; but remarked that it would avail me
  nothing—I should infallibly swing, as it was never known that any body
  got off who was tried for robbing his majesty's mail. It is difficult to
  conceive the lightness of heart which was communicated to me by these words:
  I persisted however in the silence I had meditated. From the rest of their
  conversation, which was sufficiently voluble, I learned that the mail from
  Edinburgh to London had been robbed about ten days before by two Irishmen,
  that one of them was already secured, and that I was taken up upon suspicion
  of being the other. They had a description of his person, which, though, as
  I afterwards found, it disagreed from mine in several material articles,
  appeared to them to tally to the minutest tittle. The intelligence that the
  whole proceeding against me was founded in a mistake, took an oppressive
  load from my mind. I believed that I should immediately be able to establish
  my innocence, to the satisfaction of any magistrate in the kingdom; and
  though crossed in my plans, and thwarted in my design of quitting the
  island, even after I was already at sea, this was but a trifling
  inconvenience compared with what I had had but too much reason to fear.
As soon as we came ashore, I was conducted to the house of a justice of
  peace, a man who had formerly been the captain of a collier, but who, having
  been successful in the world, had quitted this wandering life, and for some
  years had had the honour to represent his majesty's person. We were detained
  for some time in a sort of anti-room, waiting his reverence's leisure. The
  persons by whom I had been taken up were experienced in their trade, and
  insisted upon employing this interval in searching me, in presence of two of
  his worship's servants. They found upon me fifteen guineas and some silver.
  They required me to strip myself perfectly naked, that they might examine
  whether I had bank-notes concealed any where about my person. They took up
  the detached parcels of my miserable attire as I threw it from me, and felt
  them one by one, to discover whether the articles of which they were in
  search might by any device be sewn up in them. To all this I submitted
  without murmuring. It might probably come to the same thing at last; and
  summary justice was sufficiently coincident with my views, my principal
  object being to get as soon as possible out of the clutches of the
  respectable persons who now had me in custody.
This operation was scarcely completed, before we were directed to be
  ushered into his worship's apartment. My accusers opened the charge, and
  told him they had been ordered to this town, upon an intimation that one of
  the persons who robbed the Edinburgh mail was to be found here; and that
  they had taken me on board a vessel which was by this time under sail for
  Ireland. "Well," says his worship, "that is your story; now let us hear what
  account the gentleman gives of himself. What is your name—ha, sirrah?
  and from what part of Tipperary are you pleased to come?" I had already
  taken my determination upon this article; and the moment I learned the
  particulars of the charge against me, resolved, for the present at least, to
  lay aside my Irish accent, and speak my native tongue. This I had done in
  the very few words I had spoken to my conductors in the anti-room: they
  started at the metamorphosis; but they had gone too far for it to be
  possible they should retract, in consistence with their honour. I now told
  the justice that I was no Irishman, nor had ever been in that country: I was
  a native of England. This occasioned a consulting of the deposition in which
  my person was supposed to be described, and which my conductors had brought
  with them for their direction. To be sure, that required that the offender
  should be an Irishman.
Observing his worship hesitate, I thought this was the time to push the
  matter a little further. I referred to the paper, and showed that the
  description neither tallied as to height nor complexion. But then it did as
  to years and the colour of the hair; and it was not this gentleman's habit,
  as he informed me, to squabble about trifles, or to let a man's neck out of
  the halter for a pretended flaw of a few inches in his stature. "If a man
  were too short," he said, "there was no remedy like a little stretching."
  The miscalculation in my case happened to be the opposite way, but his
  reverence did not think proper to lose his jest. Upon the whole, he was
  somewhat at a loss how to proceed.
My conductors observed this, and began to tremble for the reward, which,
  two hours ago, they thought as good as in their own pocket. To retain me in
  custody they judged to be a safe speculation; if it turned out a mistake at
  last, they felt little apprehension of a suit for false imprisonment from a
  poor man, accoutred as I was, in rags. They therefore urged his worship to
  comply with their views. They told him that to be sure the evidence against
  me did not prove so strong as for their part they heartily wished it had,
  but that there were a number of suspicious circumstances respecting me. When
  I was brought up to them upon the deck of the vessel, I spoke as fine an
  Irish brogue as one shall hear in a summer's day; and now, all at once,
  there was not the least particle of it left. In searching me they had found
  upon me fifteen guineas, how should a poor beggar lad, such as I appeared,
  come honestly by fifteen guineas? Besides, when they had stripped me naked,
  though my dress was so shabby my skin had all the sleekness of a gentleman.
  In fine, for what purpose could a poor beggar, who had never been in Ireland
  in his life, want to transport himself to that country? It was as clear as
  the sun that I was no better than I should be. This reasoning, together with
  some significant winks and gestures between the justice and the plaintiffs,
  brought him over to their way of thinking. He said, I must go to Warwick,
  where it seems the other robber was at present in custody, and be confronted
  with him; and if then every thing appeared fair and satisfactory, I should
  be discharged.
No intelligence could be more terrible than that which was contained in
  these words. That I, who had found the whole country in arms against me, who
  was exposed to a pursuit so peculiarly vigilant and penetrating, should now
  be dragged to the very centre of the kingdom, without power of accommodating
  myself to circumstances, and under the immediate custody of the officers of
  justice, seemed to my ears almost the same thing as if he had pronounced
  upon me a sentence of death! I strenuously urged the injustice of this
  proceeding. I observed to the magistrate, that it was impossible I should be
  the person at whom the description pointed. It required an Irishman; I was
  no Irishman. It described a person shorter than I; a circumstance of all
  others the least capable of being counterfeited. There was not the slightest
  reason for detaining me in custody. I had been already disappointed of my
  voyage, and lost the money I had paid, down, through the officiousness of
  these gentlemen in apprehending me. I assured his worship, that every delay,
  under my circumstances, was of the utmost importance to me. It was
  impossible to devise a greater injury to be inflicted on me, than the
  proposal that, instead of being permitted to proceed upon my voyage, I
  should be sent, under arrest, into the heart of the kingdom.
My remonstrances were vain. The justice was by no means inclined to
  digest the being expostulated with in this manner by a person in the
  habiliments of a beggar. In the midst of my address he would have silenced
  me for my impertinence, but that I spoke with an earnestness with which he
  was wholly unable to contend. When I had finished, he told me it was all to
  no purpose, and that it might have been better for me, if I had shown myself
  less insolent. It was clear that I was a vagabond and a suspicious person.
  The more earnest I showed myself to get off, the more reason there was he
  should keep me fast. Perhaps, after all, I should turn out to be the felon
  in question. But, if I was not that, he had no doubt I was worse; a poacher,
  or, for what he knew, a murderer. He had a kind of a notion that he had seen
  my face before about some such affair; out of all doubt I was an old
  offender. He had it in his choice to send me to hard labour as a vagrant,
  upon the strength of my appearance and the contradictions in my story, or to
  order me to Warwick; and, out of the spontaneous goodness of his
  disposition, he chose the milder side of the alternative. He could assure me
  I should not slip through his fingers. It was of more benefit to his
  majesty's government to hang one such fellow as he suspected me to be, than,
  out of mistaken tenderness, to concern one's self for the good of all the
  beggars in the nation.
Finding it was impossible to work, in the way I desired, on a man so
  fully impressed with his own dignity and importance and my utter
  insignificance, I claimed that, at least, the money taken from my person
  should be restored to me. This was granted. His worship perhaps suspected
  that he had stretched a point in what he had already done, and was therefore
  the less unwilling to relax in this incidental circumstance. My conductors
  did not oppose themselves to this indulgence, for a reason that will appear
  in the sequel. The justice however enlarged upon his clemency in this
  proceeding. He did not know whether he was not exceeding the spirit of his
  commission in complying with my demand. So much money in my possession could
  not be honestly come by. But it was his temper to soften, as far as could be
  done with propriety, the strict letter of the law.
There were cogent reasons why the gentlemen who had originally taken me
  into custody, chose that I should continue in their custody when my
  examination was over. Every man is, in his different mode, susceptible to a
  sense of honour; and they did not choose to encounter the disgrace that
  would accrue to them, if justice had been done. Every man is in some degree
  influenced by the love of power; and they were willing I should owe any
  benefit I received, to their sovereign grace and benignity, and not to the
  mere reason of the case. It was not however an unsubstantial honour and
  barren power that formed the objects of their pursuit: no, their views were
  deeper than that. In a word, though they chose that I should retire from the
  seat of justice, as I had come before it, a prisoner, yet the tenor of my
  examination had obliged them, in spite of themselves, to suspect that I was
  innocent of the charge alleged against me. Apprehensive therefore that the
  hundred guineas which had been offered as a reward for taking the robber was
  completely out of the question in the present business, they were contented
  to strike at smaller game. Having conducted me to an inn, and given
  directions respecting a vehicle for the journey, they took me aside, while
  one of them addressed me in the following manner:—
"You see, my lad, how the case stands: hey for Warwick is the word I and
  when we are got there, what may happen then I will not pretend for to say.
  Whether you are innocent or no is no business of mine; but you are not such
  a chicken as to suppose, if so be as you are innocent, that that will make
  your game altogether sure. You say your business calls you another way, and
  as how you are in haste: I scorns to cross any man in his concerns, if I can
  help it. If therefore you will give us them there fifteen shiners, why snug
  is the word. They are of no use to you; a beggar, you know, is always at
  home. For the matter of that, we could have had them in the way of business,
  as you saw, at the justice's. But I am a man of principle; I loves to do
  things above board, and scorns to extort a shilling from any man."
He who is tinctured with principles of moral discrimination is apt upon
  occasion to be run away with by his feelings in that respect, and to forget
  the immediate interest of the moment. I confess, that the first sentiment
  excited in my mind by this overture was that of indignation. I was
  irresistibly impelled to give utterance to this feeling, and postpone for a
  moment the consideration of the future. I replied with the severity which so
  base a proceeding appeared to deserve. My bear-leaders were considerably
  surprised with my firmness, but seemed to think it beneath them to contest
  with me the principles I delivered. He who had made the overture contented
  himself with replying, "Well, well, my lad, do as you will; you are not the
  first man that has been hanged rather than part with a few guineas." His
  words did not pass unheeded by me. They were strikingly applicable to my
  situation, and I was determined not to suffer the occasion to escape me
  unimproved.
The pride of these gentlemen however was too great to admit of further
  parley for the present. They left me abruptly; having first ordered an old
  man, the father of the landlady, to stay in the room with me while they were
  absent. The old man they ordered, for security, to lock the door, and put
  the key in his pocket; at the same time mentioning below stairs the station
  in which they had left me, that the people of the house might have an eye
  upon what went forward, and not suffer me to escape. What was the intention
  of this manoeuvre I am unable certainly to pronounce. Probably it was a sort
  of compromise between their pride and their avarice; being desirous, for
  some reason or other, to drop me as soon as convenient, and therefore
  determining to wait the result of my private meditations on the proposal
  they had made.

</div></body></text></TEI>