<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="26">CHAPTER XIII.
In the midst of these reflections, another thought, which had not before
  struck me, occurred to my mind. "I exult," said I, "and reasonably, over the
  impotence of my persecutor. Is not that impotence greater than I have yet
  imagined? I say, he may cut off my existence, but cannot disturb my
  serenity. It is true: my mind, the clearness of my spirit, the firmness of
  my temper, are beyond his reach; is not my life equally so, if I please?
  What are the material obstacles, that man never subdued? What is the
  undertaking so arduous, that by some has not been accomplished? And if by
  others, why not by me? Had they stronger motives than I? Was existence more
  variously endeared to them? or had they more numerous methods by which to
  animate and adorn it? Many of those who have exerted most perseverance and
  intrepidity, were obviously my inferiors in that respect. Why should not I
  be as daring as they? Adamant and steel have a ductility like water, to a
  mind sufficiently bold and contemplative. The mind is master of itself; and
  is endowed with powers that might enable it to laugh at the tyrant's
  vigilance." I passed and repassed these ideas in my mind; and, heated with
  the contemplation, I said, "No, I will not die!"
My reading, in early youth, had been extremely miscellaneous. I had read
  of housebreakers, to whom locks and bolts were a jest, and who, vain of
  their art, exhibited the experiment of entering a house the most strongly
  barricaded, with as little noise, and almost as little trouble, as other men
  would lift up a latch. There is nothing so interesting to the juvenile mind,
  as the wonderful; there is no power that it so eagerly covets, as that of
  astonishing spectators by its miraculous exertions. Mind appeared, to my
  untutored reflections, vague, airy, and unfettered, the susceptible
  perceiver of reasons, but never intended by nature to be the slave of force.
  Why should it be in the power of man to overtake and hold me by violence?
  Why, when I choose to withdraw myself, should I not be capable of eluding
  the most vigilant search? These limbs, and this trunk, are a cumbrous and
  unfortunate load for the power of thinking to drag along with it; but why
  should not the power of thinking be able to lighten the load, till it shall
  be no longer felt?—These early modes of reflection were by no means
  indifferent to my present enquiries.
Our next-door neighbour at my father's house had been a carpenter. Fresh
  from the sort of reading I have mentioned, I was eager to examine his tools,
  their powers and their uses. This carpenter was a man of strong and vigorous
  mind; and, his faculties having been chiefly confined to the range of his
  profession, he was fertile in experiments, and ingenious in reasoning upon
  these particular topics. I therefore obtained from him considerable
  satisfaction; and, my mind being set in action, I sometimes even improved
  upon the hints he furnished. His conversation was particularly agreeable to
  me; I at first worked with him sometimes for my amusement, and afterwards
  occasionally for a short time as his journeyman. I was constitutionally
  vigorous; and, by the experience thus attained, I added to the abstract
  possession of power, the skill of applying it, when I pleased, in such a
  manner as that no part should be inefficient.
It is a strange, but no uncommon feature in the human mind, that the very
  resource of which we stand in greatest need in a critical situation, though
  already accumulated, it may be, by preceding industry, fails to present
  itself at the time when it should be called into action. Thus my mind had
  passed through two very different stages since my imprisonment, before this
  means of liberation suggested itself. My faculties were overwhelmed in the
  first instance, and raised to a pitch of enthusiasm in the second; while in
  both I took it for granted in a manner, that I must passively submit to the
  good pleasure of my persecutors.
During the period in which my mind had been thus undecided, and when I
  had been little more than a month in durance, the assizes, which were held
  twice a year in the town in which I was a prisoner, came on. Upon this
  occasion my case was not brought forward, but was suffered to stand over six
  months longer. It would have been just the same, if I had had as strong
  reason to expect acquittal as I had conviction. If I had been apprehended
  upon the most frivolous reasons upon which any justice of the peace ever
  thought proper to commit a naked beggar for trial, I must still have waited
  about two hundred and seventeen days before my innocence could be cleared.
  So imperfect are the effects of the boasted laws of a country, whose
  legislators hold their assembly from four to six months in every year! I
  could never discover with certainty, whether this delay were owing to any
  interference on the part of my prosecutor, or whether it fell out in the
  regular administration of justice, which is too solemn and dignified to
  accommodate itself to the rights or benefit of an insignificant
  individual.
But this was not the only incident that occurred to me during my
  confinement, for which I could find no satisfactory solution. It was nearly
  at the same time, that the keeper began to alter his behaviour to me. He
  sent for me one morning into the part of the building which was appropriated
  for his own use, and, after some hesitation, told me he was sorry my
  accommodations had been so indifferent, and asked whether I should like to
  have a chamber in his family? I was struck with the unexpectedness of this
  question, and desired to know whether any body had employed him to ask it.
  No, he replied; but, now the assizes were over, he had fewer felons on his
  hands, and more time to look about him. He believed I was a good kind of a
  young man, and he had taken a sort of a liking to me. I fixed my eye upon
  his countenance as he said this. I could discover none of the usual symptoms
  of kindness; he appeared to me to be acting a part, unnatural, and that sat
  with awkwardness upon him. He went on however to offer me the liberty of
  eating at his table; which, if I chose it, he said, would make no difference
  to him, and he should not think of charging me any thing for it. He had
  always indeed as much upon his hands as one person could see to; but his
  wife and his daughter Peggy would be woundily pleased to hear a person of
  learning talk, as he understood I was; and perhaps I might not feel myself
  unpleasantly circumstanced in their company.
I reflected on this proposal, and had little doubt, notwithstanding what
  the keeper had affirmed to the contrary, that it did not proceed from any
  spontaneous humanity in him, but that he had, to speak the language of
  persons of his cast, good reasons for what he did. I busied myself in
  conjectures as to who could be the author of this sort of indulgence and
  attention. The two most likely persons were Mr. Falkland and Mr. Forester.
  The latter I knew to be a man austere and inexorable towards those whom he
  deemed vicious. He piqued himself upon being insensible to those softer
  emotions, which, he believed, answered no other purpose than to seduce us
  from our duty. Mr. Falkland, on the contrary, was a man of the acutest
  sensibility; hence arose his pleasures and his pains, his virtues and his
  vices. Though he were the bitterest enemy to whom I could possibly be
  exposed, and though no sentiments of humanity could divert or control the
  bent of his mind, I yet persuaded myself, that he was more likely than his
  kinsman, to visit in idea the scene of my dungeon, and to feel impelled to
  alleviate my sufferings.
This conjecture was by no means calculated to serve as balm to my mind.
  My thoughts were full of irritation against my persecutor. How could I think
  kindly of a man, in competition with the gratification of whose ruling
  passion my good name or my life was deemed of no consideration? I saw him
  crushing the one, and bringing the other into jeopardy, with a quietness and
  composure on his part that I could not recollect without horror. I knew not
  what were his plans respecting me. I knew not whether he troubled himself so
  much as to form a barren wish for the preservation of one whose future
  prospects he had so iniquitously tarnished. I had hitherto been silent as to
  my principal topic of recrimination. But I was by no means certain, that I
  should consent to go out of the world in silence, the victim of this man's
  obduracy and art. In every view I felt my heart ulcerated with a sense of
  his injustice; and my very soul spurned these pitiful indulgences, at a time
  that he was grinding me into dust with the inexorableness of his
  vengeance.
I was influenced by these sentiments in my reply to the jailor; and I
  found a secret pleasure in pronouncing them in all their bitterness. I
  viewed him with a sarcastic smile, and said, I was glad to find him of a
  sudden become so humane: I was not however without some penetration as to
  the humanity of a jailor, and could guess at the circumstances by which it
  was produced. But he might tell his employer, that his cares were fruitless:
  I would accept no favours from a man that held a halter about my neck; and
  had courage enough to endure the worst both in time to come and
  now.—The jailor looked at me with astonishment, and turning upon his
  heel, exclaimed, "Well done, my cock! You have not had your learning for
  nothing, I see. You are set upon not dying dunghill. But that is to come,
  lad; you had better by half keep your courage till you shall find it
  wanted."
The assizes, which passed over without influence to me, produced a great
  revolution among my fellow-prisoners. I lived long enough in the jail to
  witness a general mutation of its inhabitants. One of the housebreakers (the
  rival of the Duke of Bedford), and the coiner, were hanged. Two more were
  cast for transportation, and the rest acquitted. The transports remained
  with us; and, though the prison was thus lightened of nine of its
  inhabitants, there were, at the next half-yearly period of assizes, as many
  persons on the felons' side, within three, as I had found on my first
  arrival.
The soldier, whose story I have already recorded, died on the evening of
  the very day on which the judges arrived, of a disease the consequence of
  his confinement. Such was the justice, that resulted from the laws of his
  country to an individual who would have been the ornament of any age; one
  who, of all the men I ever knew, was perhaps the kindest, of the most
  feeling heart, of the most engaging and unaffected manners, and the most
  unblemished life. The name of this man was Brightwel. Were it possible for
  my pen to consecrate him to never-dying fame, I could undertake no task more
  grateful to my heart. His judgment was penetrating and manly, totally
  unmixed with imbecility and confusion, while at the same time there was such
  an uncontending frankness in his countenance, that a superficial observer
  would have supposed he must have been the prey of the first plausible
  knavery that was practised against him. Great reason have I to remember him
  with affection! He was the most ardent, I had almost said the last, of my
  friends. Nor did I remain in this respect in his debt. There was indeed a
  great congeniality, if I may presume to say so, in our characters, except
  that I cannot pretend to rival the originality and self-created vigour of
  his mind, or to compare with, what the world has scarcely surpassed, the
  correctness and untainted purity of his conduct. He heard my story, as far
  as I thought proper to disclose it, with interest; he examined it with
  sincere impartiality; and if, at first, any doubt remained upon his mind, a
  frequent observation of me in my most unguarded moments taught him in no
  long time to place an unreserved confidence in my innocence.
He talked of the injustice of which we were mutual victims, without
  bitterness; and delighted to believe that the time would come, when the
  possibility of such intolerable oppression would be extirpated. But this, he
  said, was a happiness reserved for posterity; it was too late for us to reap
  the benefit of it. It was some consolation to him, that he could not tell
  the period in his past life, which the best judgment of which he was capable
  would teach him to spend better. He could say, with as much reason as most
  men, he had discharged his duty. But he foresaw that he should not survive
  his present calamity. This was his prediction, while yet in health. He might
  be said, in a certain sense, to have a broken heart. But, if that phrase
  were in any way applicable to him, sure never was despair more calm, more
  full of resignation and serenity.
At no time in the whole course of my adventures was I exposed to a shock
  more severe, than I received from this man's death. The circumstances of his
  fate presented themselves to my mind in their full complication of iniquity.
  From him, and the execrations with which I loaded the government that could
  be the instrument of his tragedy, I turned to myself. I beheld the
  catastrophe of Brightwel with envy. A thousand times I longed that my corse
  had lain in death, instead of his. I was only reserved, as I persuaded
  myself, for unutterable woe. In a few days he would have been acquitted; his
  liberty, his reputation restored; mankind perhaps, struck with the injustice
  he had suffered, would have shown themselves eager to balance his
  misfortunes, and obliterate his disgrace. But this man died; and I remained
  alive! I, who, though not less wrongfully treated than he, had no hope of
  reparation, must be marked as long as I lived for a villain, and in my death
  probably held up to the scorn and detestation of my species!
Such were some of the immediate reflections which the fate of this
  unfortunate martyr produced in my mind. Yet my intercourse with Brightwel
  was not, in the review, without its portion of comfort. I said, "This man
  has seen through the veil of calumny that overshades me: he has understood,
  and has loved me. Why should I despair? May I not meet hereafter with men
  ingenuous like him, who shall do me justice, and sympathise with my
  calamity? With that consolation I will be satisfied. I will rest in the arms
  of friendship, and forget the malignity of the world. Henceforth I will be
  contented with tranquil obscurity, with the cultivation of sentiment and
  wisdom, and the exercise of benevolence within a narrow circle." It was thus
  that my mind became excited to the project I was about to undertake.
I had no sooner meditated the idea of an escape, than I determined upon
  the following method of facilitating the preparations for it. I undertook to
  ingratiate myself with my keeper. In the world I have generally found such
  persons as had been acquainted with the outline of my story, regarding me
  with a sort of loathing and abhorrence, which made them avoid me with as
  much care as if I had been spotted with the plague. The idea of my having
  first robbed my patron, and then endeavouring to clear myself by charging
  him with subornation against me, placed me in a class distinct from, and
  infinitely more guilty than that of common felons. But this man was too good
  a master of his profession, to entertain aversion against a fellow-creature
  upon that score. He considered the persons committed to his custody, merely
  as so many human bodies, for whom he was responsible that they should be
  forthcoming in time and place; and the difference of innocence and guilt he
  looked down upon as an affair beneath his attention. I had not therefore the
  prejudices to encounter in recommending myself to him, that I have found so
  peculiarly obstinate in other cases. Add to which, the same motive, whatever
  it was, that had made him so profuse in his offers a little before, had
  probably its influence on the present occasion.
I informed him of my skill in the profession of a joiner, and offered to
  make him half a dozen handsome chairs, if he would facilitate my obtaining
  the tools necessary for carrying on my profession in my present confinement;
  for, without his consent previously obtained, it would have been in vain for
  me to expect that I could quietly exert an industry of this kind, even if my
  existence had depended upon it. He looked at me first, as asking himself
  what he was to understand by this novel proposal; and then, his countenance
  most graciously relaxing, said, he was glad I was come off a little of my
  high notions and my buckram, and he would see what he could do. Two days
  after, he signified his compliance. He said that, as to the matter of the
  present I had offered him, he thought nothing of that; I might do as I
  pleased in it; but I might depend upon every civility from him that he could
  show with safety to himself, if so be as, when he was civil, I did not offer
  a second time for to snap and take him up short.
Having thus gained my preliminary, I gradually accumulated tools of
  various sorts—gimlets, piercers, chisels, et cetera. I
  immediately set myself to work. The nights were long, and the sordid
  eagerness of my keeper, notwithstanding his ostentatious generosity, was
  great; I therefore petitioned for, and was indulged with, a bit of candle,
  that I might amuse myself for an hour or two with my work after I was locked
  up in my dungeon. I did not however by any means apply constantly to the
  work I had undertaken, and my jailor betrayed various tokens of impatience.
  Perhaps he was afraid I should not have finished it, before I was hanged. I
  however insisted upon working at my leisure as I pleased; and this he did
  not venture expressly to dispute. In addition to the advantages thus
  obtained, I procured secretly from Miss Peggy, who now and then came into
  the jail to make her observations of the prisoners, and who seemed to have
  conceived some partiality for my person, the implement of an iron crow.
In these proceedings it is easy to trace the vice and duplicity that must
  be expected to grow out of injustice. I know not whether my readers will
  pardon the sinister advantage I extracted from the mysterious concessions of
  my keeper. But I must acknowledge my weakness in that respect; I am writing
  my adventures, and not my apology; and I was not prepared to maintain the
  unvaried sincerity of my manners, at the expense of a speedy close of my
  existence.
My plan was now digested. I believed that, by means of the crow, I could
  easily, and without much noise, force the door of my dungeon from its
  hinges, or if not, that I could, in case of necessity, cut away the lock.
  This door led into a narrow passage, bounded on one side by the range of
  dungeons, and on the other by the jailor's and turnkeys' apartments, through
  which was the usual entrance from the street. This outlet I dared not
  attempt, for fear of disturbing the persons close to whose very door I
  should in that case have found it necessary to pass. I determined therefore
  upon another door at the further end of the passage, which was well
  barricaded, and which led to a sort of garden in the occupation of the
  keeper. This garden I had never entered, but I had had an opportunity of
  observing it from the window of the felons' day-room, which looked that way,
  the room itself being immediately over the range of dungeons. I perceived
  that it was bounded by a wall of considerable height, which I was told by my
  fellow-prisoners was the extremity of the jail on that side, and beyond
  which was a back-lane of some length, that terminated in the skirts of the
  town. Upon an accurate observation, and much reflection upon the subject, I
  found I should be able, if once I got into the garden, with my gimlets and
  piercers inserted at proper distances to make a sort of ladder, by means of
  which I could clear the wall, and once more take possession of the sweets of
  liberty. I preferred this wall to that which immediately skirted my dungeon,
  on the other side of which was a populous street.
I suffered about two days to elapse from the period at which I had
  thoroughly digested my project, and then in the very middle of the night
  began to set about its execution. The first door was attended with
  considerable difficulty; but at length this obstacle was happily removed.
  The second door was fastened on the inside. I was therefore able with
  perfect ease to push back the bolts. But the lock, which of course was
  depended upon for the principal security, and was therefore strong, was
  double-shot, and the key taken away. I endeavoured with my chisel to force
  back the bolt of the lock, but to no purpose. I then unscrewed the box of
  the lock; and, that being taken away, the door was no longer opposed to my
  wishes.
Thus far I had proceeded with the happiest success; but close on the
  other side of the door there was a kennel with a large mastiff dog, of which
  I had not the smallest previous knowledge. Though I stepped along in the
  most careful manner, this animal was disturbed, and began to bark. I was
  extremely disconcerted, but immediately applied myself to soothe the animal,
  in which I presently succeeded. I then returned along the passage to listen
  whether any body had been disturbed by the noise of the dog; resolved, if
  that had been the case, that I would return to my dungeon, and endeavour to
  replace every thing in its former state. But the whole appeared perfectly
  quiet, and I was encouraged to proceed in my operation.
I now got to the wall, and had nearly gained half the ascent, when I
  heard a voice at the garden-door, crying, "Holloa! who is there? who opened
  the door?" The man received no answer, and the night was too dark for him to
  distinguish objects at any distance. He therefore returned, as I judged,
  into the house for a light. Meantime the dog, understanding the key in which
  these interrogations were uttered, began barking again more violently than
  ever. I had now no possibility of retreat, and I was not without hopes that
  I might yet accomplish my object, and clear the wall. Meanwhile a second man
  came out, while the other was getting his lantern, and by the time I had got
  to the top of the wall was able to perceive me. He immediately set up a
  shout, and threw a large stone, which grazed me in its flight. Alarmed at my
  situation, I was obliged to descend on the other side without taking the
  necessary precautions, and in my fall nearly dislocated my ankle.
There was a door in the wall, of which I was not previously apprised;
  and, this being opened, the two men with the lantern were on the other side
  in an instant. They had then nothing to do but to run along the lane to the
  place from which I had descended. I endeavoured to rise after my fall; but
  the pain was so intense, that I was scarcely able to stand, and, after
  having limped a few paces, I twisted my foot under me, and fell down again.
  I had now no remedy, and quietly suffered myself to be retaken.

</div></body></text></TEI>