<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="44">POSTSCRIPT.
All is over. I have carried into execution my meditated attempt. My
  situation is totally changed; I now sit down to give an account of it. For
  several weeks after the completion of this dreadful business, my mind was in
  too tumultuous a state to permit me to write. I think I shall now be able to
  arrange my thoughts sufficiently for that purpose. Great God! how wondrous,
  how terrible are the events that have intervened since I was last employed
  in a similar manner! It is no wonder that my thoughts were solemn, and my
  mind filled with horrible forebodings!
Having formed my resolution, I set out from Harwich, for the metropolitan
  town of the county in which Mr. Falkland resided. Gines, I well knew, was in
  my rear. That was of no consequence to me. He might wonder at the direction
  I pursued, but he could not tell with what purpose I pursued it. My design
  was a secret, carefully locked up in my own breast. It was not without a
  sentiment of terror that I entered a town which had been the scene of my
  long imprisonment. I proceeded to the house of the chief magistrate the
  instant I arrived, that I might give no time to my adversary to counterwork
  my proceeding.
I told him who I was, and that I was come from a distant part of the
  kingdom, for the purpose of rendering him the medium of a charge of murder
  against my former patron. My name was already familiar to him. He answered,
  that he could not take cognizance of my deposition; that I was an object of
  universal execration in that part of the world; and he was determined upon
  no account to be the vehicle of my depravity.
I warned him to consider well what he was doing. I called upon him for no
  favour; I only applied to him in the regular exercise of his function. Would
  he take upon him to say that he had a right, at his pleasure, to suppress a
  charge of this complicated nature? I had to accuse Mr. Falkland of repeated
  murders. The perpetrator knew that I was in possession of the truth upon the
  subject; and, knowing that, I went perpetually in danger of my life from his
  malice and revenge. I was resolved to go through with the business, if
  justice were to be obtained from any court in England. Upon what pretence
  did he refuse my deposition? I was in every respect a competent witness. I
  was of age to understand the nature of an oath; I was in my perfect senses;
  I was untarnished by the verdict of any jury, or the sentence of any judge.
  His private opinion of my character could not alter the law of the land. I
  demanded to be confronted with Mr. Falkland, and I was well assured I should
  substantiate the charge to the satisfaction of the whole world. If he did
  not think proper to apprehend him upon my single testimony, I should be
  satisfied if he only sent him notice of the charge, and summoned him to
  appear.
The magistrate, finding me thus resolute, thought proper a little to
  lower his tone. He no longer absolutely refused to comply with my
  requisition, but condescended to expostulate with me. He represented to me
  Mr. Falkland's health, which had for some years been exceedingly
  indifferent; his having been once already brought to the most solemn
  examination upon this charge; the diabolical malice in which alone my
  proceeding must have originated; and the ten-fold ruin it would bring down
  upon my head. To all these representations my answer was short. "I was
  determined to go on, and would abide the consequences." A summons was at
  length granted, and notice sent to Mr. Falkland of the charge preferred
  against him.
Three days elapsed before any further step could be taken in this
  business. This interval in no degree contributed to tranquillise my mind.
  The thought of preferring a capital accusation against, and hastening the
  death of, such a man as Mr. Falkland, was by no means an opiate to
  reflection. At one time I commended the action, either as just revenge (for
  the benevolence of my nature was in a great degree turned to gall), or as
  necessary self-defence, or as that which, in an impartial and
  philanthropical estimate, included the smallest evil. At another time I was
  haunted with doubts. But, in spite of these variations of sentiment, I
  uniformly determined to persist! I felt as if impelled by a tide of
  unconquerable impulse. The consequences were such as might well appal the
  stoutest heart. Either the ignominious execution of a man whom I had once so
  deeply venerated, and whom now I sometimes suspected not to be without his
  claims to veneration; or a confirmation, perhaps an increase, of the
  calamities I had so long endured. Yet these I preferred to a state of
  uncertainty. I desired to know the worst; to put an end to the hope, however
  faint, which had been so long my torment; and, above all, to exhaust and
  finish the catalogue of expedients that were at my disposition. My mind was
  worked up to a state little short of frenzy. My body was in a burning fever
  with the agitation of my thoughts. When I laid my hand upon my bosom or my
  head, it seemed to scorch them with the fervency of its heat. I could not
  sit still for a moment. I panted with incessant desire that the dreadful
  crisis I had so eagerly invoked, were come, and were over.
After an interval of three days, I met Mr. Falkland in the presence of
  the magistrate to whom I had applied upon the subject. I had only two hours'
  notice to prepare myself; Mr. Falkland seeming as eager as I to have the
  question brought to a crisis, and laid at rest for ever. I had an
  opportunity, before the examination, to learn that Mr. Forester was drawn by
  some business on an excursion on the continent; and that Collins, whose
  health when I saw him was in a very precarious state, was at this time
  confined with an alarming illness. His constitution had been wholly broken
  by his West Indian expedition. The audience I met at the house of the
  magistrate consisted of several gentlemen and others selected for the
  purpose; the plan being, in some respects, as in the former instance, to
  find a medium between the suspicious air of a private examination, and the
  indelicacy, as it was styled, of an examination exposed to the remark of
  every casual spectator.
I can conceive of no shock greater than that I received from the sight of
  Mr. Falkland. His appearance on the last occasion on which we met had been
  haggard, ghost-like, and wild, energy in his gestures, and frenzy in his
  aspect. It was now the appearance of a corpse. He was brought in in a chair,
  unable to stand, fatigued and almost destroyed by the journey he had just
  taken. His visage was colourless; his limbs destitute of motion, almost of
  life. His head reclined upon his bosom, except that now and then he lifted
  it up, and opened his eyes with a languid glance; immediately after which he
  sunk back into his former apparent insensibility. He seemed not to have
  three hours to live. He had kept his chamber for several weeks; but the
  summons of the magistrate had been delivered to him at his bed-side, his
  orders respecting letters and written papers being so peremptory that no one
  dared to disobey them. Upon reading the paper he was seized with a very
  dangerous fit; but, as soon as he recovered, he insisted upon being
  conveyed, with all practicable expedition, to the place of appointment.
  Falkland, in the most helpless state, was still Falkland, firm in command,
  and capable to extort obedience from every one that approached him.
What a sight was this to me! Till the moment that Falkland was presented
  to my view, my breast was steeled to pity. I thought that I had coolly
  entered into the reason of the case (passion, in a state of solemn and
  omnipotent vehemence, always appears to be coolness to him in whom it
  domineers), and that I had determined impartially and justly. I believed
  that, if Mr. Falkland were permitted to persist in his schemes, we must both
  of us be completely wretched. I believed that it was in my power, by the
  resolution I had formed, to throw my share of this wretchedness from me, and
  that his could scarcely be increased. It appeared therefore to my mind, to
  be a mere piece of equity and justice, such as an impartial spectator would
  desire, that one person should be miserable in preference to two; that one
  person rather than two should be incapacitated from acting his part, and
  contributing his share to the general welfare. I thought that in this
  business I had risen superior to personal considerations, and judged with a
  total neglect of the suggestions of self-regard. It is true, Mr. Falkland
  was mortal, but, notwithstanding his apparent decay, he might live long.
  Ought I to submit to waste the best years of my life in my present wretched
  situation? He had declared that his reputation should be for ever inviolate;
  this was his ruling passion, the thought that worked his soul to madness. He
  would probably therefore leave a legacy of persecution to be received by me
  from the hands of Gines, or some other villain equally atrocious, when he
  should himself be no more. Now or never was the time for me to redeem my
  future life from endless woe.
But all these fine-spun reasonings vanished before the object that was
  now presented to me. "Shall I trample upon a man thus dreadfully reduced?
  Shall I point my animosity against one, whom the system of nature has
  brought down to the grave? Shall I poison, with sounds the most intolerable
  to his ears, the last moments of a man like Falkland? It is impossible.
  There must have been some dreadful mistake in the train of argument that
  persuaded me to be the author of this hateful scene. There must have been a
  better and more magnanimous remedy to the evils under which I groaned."
It was too late: the mistake I had committed was now gone past all power
  of recall. Here was Falkland, solemnly brought before a magistrate to answer
  to a charge of murder. Here I stood, having already declared myself the
  author of the charge, gravely and sacredly pledged to support it. This was
  my situation; and, thus situated, I was called upon immediately to act. My
  whole frame shook. I would eagerly have consented that that moment should
  have been the last of my existence. I however believed, that the conduct now
  most indispensably incumbent on me was to lay the emotions of my soul naked
  before my hearers. I looked first at Mr. Falkland, and then at the
  magistrate and attendants, and then at Mr. Falkland again. My voice was
  suffocated with agony. I began:—
"Why cannot I recall the last four days of my life? How was it possible
  for me to be so eager, so obstinate, in a purpose so diabolical? Oh, that I
  had listened to the expostulations of the magistrate that hears me, or
  submitted to the well-meant despotism of his authority! Hitherto I have been
  only miserable; henceforth I shall account myself base! Hitherto, though
  hardly treated by mankind, I stood acquitted at the bar of my own
  conscience. I had not filled up the measure of my wretchedness!
"Would to God it were possible for me to retire from this scene without
  uttering another word! I would brave the consequences—I would submit
  to any imputation of cowardice, falsehood, and profligacy, rather than add
  to the weight of misfortune with which Mr. Falkland is overwhelmed. But the
  situation, and the demands of Mr. Falkland himself, forbid me. He, in
  compassion for whose fallen state I would willingly forget every interest of
  my own, would compel me to accuse, that he might enter upon his
  justification. I will confess every sentiment of my heart.
"No penitence, no anguish, can expiate the folly and the cruelty of this
  last act I have perpetrated. But Mr. Falkland well knows—I affirm it
  in his presence—how unwillingly I have proceeded to this extremity. I
  have reverenced him; he was worthy of reverence: I have loved him; he was
  endowed with qualities that partook of divine.
"From the first moment I saw him, I conceived the most ardent admiration.
  He condescended to encourage me; I attached myself to him with the fulness
  of my affection. He was unhappy; I exerted myself with youthful curiosity to
  discover the secret of his woe. This was the beginning of misfortune.
"What shall I say?—He was indeed the murderer of Tyrrel; he
  suffered the Hawkinses to be executed, knowing that they were innocent, and
  that he alone was guilty. After successive surmises, after various
  indiscretions on my part, and indications on his, he at length confided to
  me at full the fatal tale!
"Mr. Falkland! I most solemnly conjure you to recollect yourself! Did I
  ever prove myself unworthy of your confidence? The secret was a most painful
  burthen to me; it was the extremest folly that led me unthinkingly to gain
  possession of it; but I would have died a thousand deaths rather than betray
  it. It was the jealousy of your own thoughts, and the weight that hung upon
  your mind, that led you to watch my motions, and to conceive alarm from
  every particle of my conduct.
"You began in confidence; why did you not continue in confidence? The
  evil that resulted from my original imprudence would then have been
  comparatively little. You threatened me: did I then betray you? A word from
  my lips at that time would have freed me from your threats for ever. I bore
  them for a considerable period, and at last quitted your service, and threw
  myself a fugitive upon the world, in silence. Why did you not suffer me to
  depart? You brought me back by stratagem and violence, and wantonly accused
  me of an enormous felony! Did I then mention a syllable of the murder, the
  secret of which was in my possession?
"Where is the man that has suffered more from the injustice of society
  than I have done? I was accused of a villainy that my heart abhorred. I was
  sent to jail. I will not enumerate the horrors of my prison, the lightest of
  which would make the heart of humanity shudder. I looked forward to the
  gallows! Young, ambitious, fond of life, innocent as the child unborn, I
  looked forward to the gallows! I believed that one word of resolute
  accusation against my patron would deliver me; yet I was silent, I armed
  myself with patience, uncertain whether it were better to accuse or to die.
  Did this show me a man unworthy to be trusted?
"I determined to break out of prison. With infinite difficulty, and
  repeated miscarriages, I at length effected my purpose. Instantly a
  proclamation, with a hundred guineas reward, was issued for apprehending me.
  I was obliged to take shelter among the refuse of mankind, in the midst of a
  gang of thieves. I encountered the most imminent peril of my life when I
  entered this retreat, and when I quitted it. Immediately after, I travelled
  almost the whole length of the kingdom, in poverty and distress, in hourly
  danger of being retaken and manacled like a felon. I would have fled my
  country; I was prevented. I had recourse to various disguises; I was
  innocent, and yet was compelled to as many arts and subterfuges as could
  have been entailed on the worst of villains. In London I was as much
  harassed and as repeatedly alarmed as I had been in my flight through the
  country. Did all these persecutions persuade me to put an end to my silence?
  No: I suffered them with patience and submission; I did not make one attempt
  to retort them upon their author.
"I fell at last into the hands of the miscreants that are nourished with
  human blood. In this terrible situation I, for the first time, attempted, by
  turning informer, to throw the weight from myself. Happily for me, the
  London magistrate listened to my tale with insolent contempt.
"I soon, and long, repented of my rashness, and rejoiced in my
  miscarriage.
"I acknowledge that, in various ways, Mr. Falkland showed humanity
  towards me during this period. He would have prevented my going to prison at
  first; he contributed towards my subsistence during my detention; he had no
  share in the pursuit that had been set on foot against me; he at length
  procured my discharge, when brought forward for trial. But a great part of
  his forbearance was unknown to me; I supposed him to be my unrelenting
  pursuer. I could not forget that, whoever heaped calamities on me in the
  sequel, they all originated in his forged accusation.
"The prosecution against me for felony was now at an end. Why were not my
  sufferings permitted to terminate then, and I allowed to hide my weary head
  in some obscure yet tranquil retreat? Had I not sufficiently proved my
  constancy and fidelity? Would not a compromise in this situation have been
  most wise and most secure? But the restless and jealous anxiety of Mr.
  Falkland would not permit him to repose the least atom of confidence. The
  only compromise that he proposed was that, with my own hand, I should sign
  myself a villain. I refused this proposal, and have ever since been driven
  from place to place, deprived of peace, of honest fame, even of bread. For a
  long time I persisted in the resolution that no emergency should convert me
  into the assailant. In an evil hour I at last listened to my resentment and
  impatience, and the hateful mistake into which I fell has produced the
  present scene.
"I now see that mistake in all its enormity. I am sure that if I had
  opened my heart to Mr. Falkland, if I had told to him privately the tale
  that I have now been telling, he could not have resisted my reasonable
  demand. After all his precautions, he must ultimately have depended upon my
  forbearance. Could he be sure that, if I were at last worked up to disclose
  every thing I knew, and to enforce it with all the energy I could exert, I
  should obtain no credit? If he must in every case be at my mercy, in which
  mode ought he to have sought his safety, in conciliation, or in inexorable
  cruelty?
"Mr. Falkland is of a noble nature. Yes; in spite of the catastrophe of
  Tyrrel, of the miserable end of the Hawkinses, and of all that I have myself
  suffered, I affirm that he has qualities of the most admirable kind. It is
  therefore impossible that he could have resisted a frank and fervent
  expostulation, the frankness and the fervour in which the whole soul is
  poured out. I despaired, while it was yet time to have made the just
  experiment; but my despair was criminal, was treason against the sovereignty
  of truth.
"I have told a plain and unadulterated tale. I came hither to curse, but
  I remain to bless. I came to accuse, but am compelled to applaud. I proclaim
  to all the world, that Mr. Falkland is a man worthy of affection and
  kindness, and that I am myself the basest and most odious of mankind! Never
  will I forgive myself the iniquity of this day. The memory will always haunt
  me, and embitter every hour of my existence. In thus acting I have been a
  murderer—a cool, deliberate, unfeeling murderer.—I have said
  what my accursed precipitation has obliged me to say. Do with me as you
  please! I ask no favour. Death would be a kindness, compared to what I
  feel!"
Such were the accents dictated by my remorse. I poured them out with
  uncontrollable impetuosity; for my heart was pierced, and I was compelled to
  give vent to its anguish. Every one that heard me, was petrified with
  astonishment. Every one that heard me, was melted into tears. They could not
  resist the ardour with which I praised the great qualities of Falkland; they
  manifested their sympathy in the tokens of my penitence.
How shall I describe the feelings of this unfortunate man? Before I
  began, he seemed sunk and debilitated, incapable of any strenuous
  impression. When I mentioned the murder, I could perceive in him an
  involuntary shuddering, though it was counteracted partly by the feebleness
  of his frame, and partly by the energy of his mind. This was an allegation
  he expected, and he had endeavoured to prepare himself for it. But there was
  much of what I said, of which he had had no previous conception. When I
  expressed the anguish of my mind, he seemed at first startled and alarmed,
  lest this should be a new expedient to gain credit to my tale. His
  indignation against me was great for having retained all my resentment
  towards him, thus, as it might be, to the last hour of his existence. It was
  increased when he discovered me, as he supposed, using a pretence of
  liberality and sentiment to give new edge to my hostility. But as I went on
  he could no longer resist. He saw my sincerity; he was penetrated with my
  grief and compunction. He rose from his seat, supported by the attendants,
  and—to my infinite astonishment—threw himself into my arms!
"Williams," said he, "you have conquered! I see too late the greatness
  and elevation of your mind. I confess that it is to my fault and not yours,
  that it is to the excess of jealousy that was ever burning in my bosom, that
  I owe my ruin. I could have resisted any plan of malicious accusation you
  might have brought against me. But I see that the artless and manly story
  you have told, has carried conviction to every hearer. All my prospects are
  concluded. All that I most ardently desired, is for ever frustrated. I have
  spent a life of the basest cruelty, to cover one act of momentary vice, and
  to protect myself against the prejudices of my species. I stand now
  completely detected. My name will be consecrated to infamy, while your
  heroism, your patience, and your virtues will be for ever admired. You have
  inflicted on me the most fatal of all mischiefs; but I bless the hand that
  wounds me. And now,"—turning to the magistrate—"and now, do with
  me as you please. I am prepared to suffer all the vengeance of the law. You
  cannot inflict on me more than I deserve. You cannot hate me, more than I
  hate myself. I am the most execrable of all villains. I have for many years
  (I know not how long) dragged on a miserable existence in insupportable
  pain. I am at last, in recompense for all my labours and my crimes,
  dismissed from it with the disappointment of my only remaining hope, the
  destruction of that for the sake of which alone I consented to exist. It was
  worthy of such a life, that it should continue just long enough to witness
  this final overthrow. If however you wish to punish me, you must be speedy
  in your justice; for, as reputation was the blood that warmed my heart, so I
  feel that death and infamy must seize me together."
I record the praises bestowed on me by Falkland, not because I deserved
  them, but because they serve to aggravate the baseness of my cruelty. He
  survived this dreadful scene but three days. I have been his murderer. It
  was fit that he should praise my patience, who has fallen a victim, life and
  fame, to my precipitation! It would have been merciful in comparison, if I
  had planted a dagger in his heart. He would have thanked me for my kindness.
  But, atrocious, execrable wretch that I have been! I wantonly inflicted on
  him an anguish a thousand times worse than death. Meanwhile I endure the
  penalty of my crime. His figure is ever in imagination before me. Waking or
  sleeping, I still behold him. He seems mildly to expostulate with me for my
  unfeeling behaviour. I live the devoted victim of conscious reproach. Alas!
  I am the same Caleb Williams that, so short a time ago, boasted that,
  however great were the calamities I endured, I was still innocent.
Such has been the result of a project I formed, for delivering myself
  from the evil that had so long attended me. I thought that, if Falkland were
  dead, I should return once again to all that makes life worth possessing. I
  thought that, if the guilt of Falkland were established, fortune and the
  world would smile upon my efforts. Both these events are accomplished; and
  it is now only that I am truly miserable.
Why should my reflections perpetually centre upon myself?—self, an
  overweening regard to which has been the source of my errors! Falkland, I
  will think only of thee, and from that thought will draw ever-fresh
  nourishment for my sorrows! One generous, one disinterested tear I will
  consecrate to thy ashes! A nobler spirit lived not among the sons of men.
  Thy intellectual powers were truly sublime, and thy bosom burned with a
  god-like ambition. But of what use are talents and sentiments in the corrupt
  wilderness of human society? It is a rank and rotten soil, from which every
  finer shrub draws poison as it grows. All that, in a happier field and a
  purer air, would expand into virtue and germinate into usefulness, is thus
  concerted into henbane and deadly nightshade.
Falkland! thou enteredst upon thy career with the purest and most
  laudable intentions. But thou imbibedst the poison of chivalry with thy
  earliest youth; and the base and low-minded envy that met thee on thy return
  to thy native seats, operated with this poison to hurry thee into madness.
  Soon, too soon, by this fatal coincidence, were the blooming hopes of thy
  youth blasted for ever. From that moment thou only continuedst to live to
  the phantom of departed honour. From that moment thy benevolence was, in a
  great part, turned into rankling jealousy and inexorable precaution. Year
  after year didst thou spend in this miserable project of imposture; and only
  at last continuedst to live, long enough to see, by my misjudging and
  abhorred intervention, thy closing hope disappointed, and thy death
  accompanied with the foulest disgrace!
I began these memoirs with the idea of vindicating my character. I have
  now no character that I wish to vindicate: but I will finish them that thy
  story may be fully understood; and that, if those errors of thy life be
  known which thou so ardently desiredst to conceal, the world may at least
  not hear and repeat a half-told and mangled tale.
THE END.
</div></body></text></TEI>