<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="1">CHAPTER I.
My life has for several years been a theatre of calamity. I have been a
  mark for the vigilance of tyranny, and I could not escape. My fairest
  prospects have been blasted. My enemy has shown himself inaccessible to
  entreaties, and untired in persecution. My fame, as well as my happiness,
  has become his victim. Every one, as far as my story has been known, has
  refused to assist me in my distress, and has execrated my name. I have not
  deserved this treatment. My own conscience witnesses in behalf of that
  innocence, my pretensions to which are regarded in the world as incredible.
  There is now, however, little hope that I shall escape from the toils that
  universally beset me. I am incited to the penning of these memoirs only by a
  desire to divert my mind from the deplorableness of my situation, and a
  faint idea that posterity may by their means be induced to render me a
  justice which my contemporaries refuse. My story will, at least, appear to
  have that consistency which is seldom attendant but upon truth.
I was born of humble parents, in a remote county of England. Their
  occupations were such as usually fall to the lot of peasants, and they had
  no portion to give me, but an education free from the usual sources of
  depravity, and the inheritance, long since lost by their unfortunate
  progeny! of an honest fame. I was taught the rudiments of no science, except
  reading, writing, and arithmetic. But I had an inquisitive mind, and
  neglected no means of information from conversation or books. My improvement
  was greater than my condition in life afforded room to expect.
There are other circumstances deserving to be mentioned as having
  influenced the history of my future life. I was somewhat above the middle
  stature. Without being particularly athletic in appearance, or large in my
  dimensions, I was uncommonly vigorous and active. My joints were supple, and
  I was formed to excel in youthful sports. The habits of my mind, however,
  were to a certain degree at war with the dictates of boyish vanity. I had
  considerable aversion to the boisterous gaiety of the village gallants, and
  contrived to satisfy my love of praise with an unfrequent apparition at
  their amusements. My excellence in these respects, however, gave a turn to
  my meditations. I delighted to read of feats of activity, and was
  particularly interested by tales in which corporeal ingenuity or strength
  are the means resorted to for supplying resources and conquering
  difficulties. I inured myself to mechanical pursuits, and devoted much of my
  time to an endeavour after mechanical invention.
The spring of action which, perhaps more than any other, characterised
  the whole train of my life, was curiosity. It was this that gave me my
  mechanical turn; I was desirous of tracing the variety of effects which
  might be produced from given causes. It was this that made me a sort of
  natural philosopher; I could not rest till I had acquainted myself with the
  solutions that had been invented for the phenomena of the universe. In fine,
  this produced in me an invincible attachment to books of narrative and
  romance. I panted for the unravelling of an adventure with an anxiety,
  perhaps almost equal to that of the man whose future happiness or misery
  depended on its issue. I read, I devoured compositions of this sort. They
  took possession of my soul; and the effects they produced were frequently
  discernible in my external appearance and my health. My curiosity, however,
  was not entirely ignoble: village anecdotes and scandal had no charms for
  me: my imagination must be excited; and when that was not done, my curiosity
  was dormant.
The residence of my parents was within the manor of Ferdinando Falkland,
  a country squire of considerable opulence. At an early age I attracted the
  favourable notice of Mr. Collins, this gentleman's steward, who used to call
  in occasionally at my father's. He observed the particulars of my progress
  with approbation, and made a favourable report to his master of my industry
  and genius.
In the summer of the year ----, Mr. Falkland visited his estate in our
  county after an absence of several months. This was a period of misfortune
  to me. I was then eighteen years of age. My father lay dead in our cottage.
  I had lost my mother some years before. In this forlorn situation I was
  surprised with a message from the squire, ordering me to repair to the
  mansion-house the morning after my father's funeral.
Though I was not a stranger to books, I had no practical acquaintance
  with men. I had never had occasion to address a person of this elevated
  rank, and I felt no small uneasiness and awe on the present occasion. I
  found Mr. Falkland a man of small stature, with an extreme delicacy of form
  and appearance. In place of the hard-favoured and inflexible visages I had
  been accustomed to observe, every muscle and petty line of his countenance
  seemed to be in an inconceivable degree pregnant with meaning. His manner
  was kind, attentive, and humane. His eye was full of animation; but there
  was a grave and sad solemnity in his air, which, for want of experience, I
  imagined was the inheritance of the great, and the instrument by which the
  distance between them and their inferiors was maintained. His look bespoke
  the unquietness of his mind, and frequently wandered with an expression of
  disconsolateness and anxiety.
My reception was as gracious and encouraging as I could possibly desire.
  Mr. Falkland questioned me respecting my learning, and my conceptions of men
  and things, and listened to my answers with condescension and approbation.
  This kindness soon restored to me a considerable part of my self-possession,
  though I still felt restrained by the graceful, but unaltered dignity of his
  carriage. When Mr. Falkland had satisfied his curiosity, he proceeded to
  inform me that he was in want of a secretary, that I appeared to him
  sufficiently qualified for that office, and that, if, in my present change
  of situation, occasioned by the death of my father, I approved of the
  employment, he would take me into his family.
I felt highly flattered by the proposal, and was warm in the expression
  of my acknowledgments. I set eagerly about the disposal of the little
  property my father had left, in which I was assisted by Mr. Collins. I had
  not now a relation in the world, upon whose kindness and interposition I had
  any direct claim. But, far from regarding this deserted situation with
  terror, I formed golden visions of the station I was about to occupy. I
  little suspected that the gaiety and lightness of heart I had hitherto
  enjoyed were upon the point of leaving me for ever, and that the rest of my
  days were devoted to misery and alarm.
My employment was easy and agreeable. It consisted partly in the
  transcribing and arranging certain papers, and partly in writing from my
  master's dictation letters of business, as well as sketches of literary
  composition. Many of these latter consisted of an analytical survey of the
  plans of different authors and conjectural speculations upon hints they
  afforded, tending either to the detection of their errors, or the carrying
  forward their discoveries. All of them bore powerful marks of a profound and
  elegant mind, well stored with literature, and possessed of an uncommon
  share of activity and discrimination.
My station was in that part of the house which was appropriated for the
  reception of books, it being my duty to perform the functions of librarian
  as well as secretary. Here my hours would have glided in tranquillity and
  peace, had not my situation included in it circumstances totally different
  from those which attended me in my father's cottage. In early life my mind
  had been much engrossed by reading and reflection: my intercourse with my
  fellow mortals was occasional and short. But, in my new residence, I was
  excited by every motive of interest and novelty to study my master's
  character; and I found in it an ample field for speculation and
  conjecture.
His mode of living was in the utmost degree recluse and solitary. He had
  no inclination to scenes of revelry and mirth. He avoided the busy haunts of
  men; nor did he seem desirous to compensate for this privation by the
  confidence of friendship. He appeared a total stranger to every thing which
  usually bears the appellation of pleasure. His features were scarcely ever
  relaxed into a smile, nor did that air which spoke the unhappiness of his
  mind at any time forsake them: yet his manners were by no means such as
  denoted moroseness and misanthropy. He was compassionate and considerate for
  others, though the stateliness of his carriage and the reserve of his temper
  were at no time interrupted. His appearance and general behaviour might have
  strongly interested all persons in his favour; but the coldness of his
  address, and the impenetrableness of his sentiments, seemed to forbid those
  demonstrations of kindness to which one might otherwise have been
  prompted.
Such was the general appearance of Mr. Falkland: but his disposition was
  extremely unequal. The distemper which afflicted him with incessant gloom
  had its paroxysms. Sometimes he was hasty, peevish, and tyrannical; but this
  proceeded rather from the torment of his mind than an unfeeling disposition;
  and when reflection recurred, he appeared willing that the weight of his
  misfortune should fall wholly upon himself. Sometimes he entirely lost his
  self-possession, and his behaviour was changed into frenzy: he would strike
  his forehead, his brows became knit, his features distorted, and his teeth
  ground one against the other. When he felt the approach of these symptoms, he
  would suddenly rise, and, leaving the occupation, whatever it was, in which
  he was engaged, hasten into a solitude upon which no person dared to
  intrude.
It must not be supposed that the whole of what I am describing was
  visible to the persons about him; nor, indeed, was I acquainted with it in
  the extent here stated but after a considerable time, and in gradual
  succession. With respect to the domestics in general, they saw but little of
  their master. None of them, except myself, from the nature of my functions,
  and Mr. Collins, from the antiquity of his service and the respectableness
  of his character, approached Mr. Falkland, but at stated seasons and for a
  very short interval. They knew him only by the benevolence of his actions,
  and the principles of inflexible integrity by which he was ordinarily
  guided; and though they would sometimes indulge their conjectures respecting
  his singularities, they regarded him upon the whole with veneration, as a
  being of a superior order.
One day, when I had been about three months in the service of my patron,
  I went to a closet, or small apartment, which was separated from the library
  by a narrow gallery that was lighted by a small window near the roof. I had
  conceived that there was no person in the room, and intended only to put any
  thing in order that I might find out of its place. As I opened the door, I
  heard at the same instant a deep groan, expressive of intolerable anguish.
  The sound of the door in opening seemed to alarm the person within; I heard
  the lid of a trunk hastily shut, and the noise as of fastening a lock. I
  conceived that Mr. Falkland was there, and was going instantly to retire;
  but at that moment a voice, that seemed supernaturally tremendous,
  exclaimed, Who is there? The voice was Mr. Falkland's. The sound of it
  thrilled my very vitals. I endeavoured to answer, but my speech failed, and
  being incapable of any other reply, I instinctively advanced within the door
  into the room. Mr. Falkland was just risen from the floor upon which he had
  been sitting or kneeling. His face betrayed strong symptoms of confusion.
  With a violent effort, however, these symptoms vanished, and instantaneously
  gave place to a countenance sparkling with rage.
"Villain!" cried he, "what has brought you here?" I hesitated a confused
  and irresolute answer. "Wretch!" interrupted Mr. Falkland, with
  uncontrollable impatience, "you want to ruin me. You set yourself as a spy
  upon my actions; but bitterly shall you repent your insolence. Do you think
  you shall watch my privacies with impunity?" I attempted to defend myself.
  "Begone, devil!" rejoined he. "Quit the room, or I will trample you into
  atoms." Saying this, he advanced towards me. But I was already sufficiently
  terrified, and vanished in a moment. I heard the door shut after me with
  violence; and thus ended this extraordinary scene.
I saw him again in the evening, and he was then tolerably composed. His
  behaviour, which was always kind, was now doubly attentive and soothing. He
  seemed to have something of which he wished to disburthen his mind, but to
  want words in which to convey it. I looked at him with anxiety and
  affection. He made two unsuccessful efforts, shook his head, and then
  putting five guineas into my hand, pressed it in a manner that I could feel
  proceeded from a mind pregnant with various emotions, though I could not
  interpret them. Having done this, he seemed immediately to recollect
  himself, and to take refuge in the usual distance and solemnity of his
  manner.
I easily understood that secrecy was one of the things expected from me;
  and, indeed, my mind was too much disposed to meditate upon what I had heard
  and seen, to make it a topic of indiscriminate communication. Mr. Collins,
  however, and myself happened to sup together that evening, which was but
  seldom the case, his avocations obliging him to be much abroad. He could not
  help observing an uncommon dejection and anxiety in my countenance, and
  affectionately enquired into the reason. I endeavoured to evade his
  questions, but my youth and ignorance of the world gave me little advantage
  for that purpose. Beside this, I had been accustomed to view Mr. Collins
  with considerable attachment, and I conceived from the nature of his
  situation that there could be small impropriety in making him my confident
  in the present instance. I repeated to him minutely every thing that had
  passed, and concluded with a solemn declaration that, though treated with
  caprice, I was not anxious for myself; no inconvenience or danger should
  ever lead me to a pusillanimous behaviour; and I felt only for my patron,
  who, with every advantage for happiness, and being in the highest degree
  worthy of it, seemed destined to undergo unmerited distress.
In answer to my communication, Mr. Collins informed me that some
  incidents, of a nature similar to that which I related, had fallen under his
  own knowledge, and that from the whole he could not help concluding that our
  unfortunate patron, was at times disordered in his intellects. "Alas!"
  continued he, "it was not always thus! Ferdinando Falkland was once the
  gayest of the gay. Not indeed of that frothy sort, who excite contempt
  instead of admiration, and whose levity argues thoughtlessness rather than
  felicity. His gaiety was always accompanied with dignity. It was the gaiety
  of the hero and the scholar. It was chastened with reflection and
  sensibility, and never lost sight either of good taste or humanity. Such as
  it was however, it denoted a genuine hilarity of heart, imparted an
  inconceivable brilliancy to his company and conversation, and rendered him
  the perpetual delight of the diversified circles he then willingly
  frequented. You see nothing of him, my dear Williams, but the ruin of that
  Falkland who was courted by sages, and adored by the fair. His youth,
  distinguished in its outset by the most unusual promise, is tarnished. His
  sensibility is shrunk up and withered by events the most disgustful to his
  feelings. His mind was fraught with all the rhapsodies of visionary honour;
  and, in his sense, nothing but the grosser part, the mere shell of Falkland,
  was capable of surviving the wound that his pride has sustained."
These reflections of my friend Collins strongly tended to inflame my
  curiosity, and I requested him to enter into a more copious explanation.
  With this request he readily complied; as conceiving that whatever delicacy
  it became him to exercise in ordinary cases, it would be out of place in my
  situation; and thinking it not improbable that Mr. Falkland, but for the
  disturbance and inflammation of his mind, would be disposed to a similar
  communication. I shall interweave with Mr. Collins's story various
  information which I afterwards received from other quarters, that I may give
  all possible perspicuity to the series of events. To avoid confusion in my
  narrative, I shall drop the person of Collins, and assume to be myself the
  historian of our patron. To the reader it may appear at first sight as if
  this detail of the preceding life of Mr. Falkland were foreign to my
  history. Alas! I know from bitter experience that it is otherwise. My heart
  bleeds at the recollection of his misfortunes, as if they were my own. How
  can it fail to do so? To his story the whole fortune of my life was linked:
  because he was miserable, my happiness, my name, and my existence have been
  irretrievably blasted.

</div></body></text></TEI>