<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="10">CHAPTER X.
It may easily be supposed, that the ill temper cherished by Mr. Tyrrel in
  his contention with Hawkins, and the increasing animosity between him and
  Mr. Falkland, added to the impatience with which he thought of the escape of
  Emily.
Mr. Tyrrel heard with astonishment of the miscarriage of an expedient, of
  the success of which he had not previously entertained the slightest
  suspicion. He became frantic with vexation. Grimes had not dared to signify
  the event of his expedition in person, and the footman whom he desired to
  announce to his master that Miss Melville was lost, the moment after fled
  from his presence with the most dreadful apprehensions. Presently he
  bellowed for Grimes, and the young man at last appeared before him, more
  dead than alive. Grimes he compelled to repeat the particulars of the tale;
  which he had no sooner done, than he once again slunk away, shocked at the
  execrations with which Mr. Tyrrel overwhelmed him. Grimes was no coward; but
  he reverenced the inborn divinity that attends upon rank, as Indians worship
  the devil. Nor was this all. The rage of Mr. Tyrrel was so ungovernable and
  fierce, that few hearts could have been found so stout, as not to have
  trembled before it with a sort of unconquerable inferiority.
He no sooner obtained a moment's pause than he began to recall to his
  tempestuous mind the various circumstances of the case. His complaints were
  bitter; and, in a tranquil observer, might have produced the united feeling
  of pity for his sufferings, and horror at his depravity. He recollected all
  the precautions he had used; he could scarcely find a flaw in the process;
  and he cursed that blind and malicious power which delighted to cross his
  most deep-laid schemes. "Of this malice he was beyond all other human beings
  the object. He was mocked with the shadow of power; and when he lifted his
  hand to smite, it was struck with sudden palsy. [In the bitterness of his
  anguish, he forgot his recent triumph over Hawkins, or perhaps he regarded
  it less as a triumph, than an overthrow, because it had failed of coming up
  to the extent of his malice.] To what purpose had Heaven given him a feeling
  of injury, and an instinct to resent, while he could in no case make his
  resentment felt! It was only necessary for him to be the enemy of any
  person, to insure that person's being safe against the reach of misfortune.
  What insults, the most shocking and repeated, had he received from this
  paltry girl! And by whom was she now torn from his indignation? By that
  devil that haunted him at every moment, that crossed him at every step, that
  fixed at pleasure his arrows in his heart, and made mows and mockery at his
  insufferable tortures."
There was one other reflection that increased his anguish, and made him
  careless and desperate as to his future conduct. It was in vain to conceal
  from himself that his reputation would be cruelly wounded by this event. He
  had imagined that, while Emily was forced into this odious marriage, she
  would be obliged by decorum, as soon as the event was decided, to draw a
  veil over the compulsion she had suffered. But this security was now lost,
  and Mr. Falkland would take a pride in publishing his dishonour. Though the
  provocations he had received from Miss Melville would, in his own opinion,
  have justified him in any treatment he should have thought proper to
  inflict, he was sensible the world would see the matter in a different
  light. This reflection augmented the violence of his resolutions, and
  determined him to refuse no means by which he could transfer the anguish
  that now preyed upon his own mind to that of another.
Meanwhile, the composure and magnanimity of Emily had considerably
  subsided, the moment she believed herself in a place of safety. While danger
  and injustice assailed her with their menaces, she found in herself a
  courage that disdained to yield. The succeeding appearance of calm was more
  fatal to her. There was nothing now, powerfully to foster her courage or
  excite her energy. She looked back at the trials she had passed, and her
  soul sickened at the recollection of that, which, while it was in act, she
  had had the fortitude to endure. Till the period at which Mr. Tyrrel had
  been inspired with this cruel antipathy, she had been in all instances a
  stranger to anxiety and fear. Uninured to misfortune, she had suddenly and
  without preparation been made the subject of the most infernal malignity.
  When a man of robust and vigorous constitution has a fit of sickness, it
  produces a more powerful effect, than the same indisposition upon a delicate
  valetudinarian. Such was the case with Miss Melville. She passed the
  succeeding night sleepless and uneasy, and was found in the morning with a
  high fever. Her distemper resisted for the present all attempts to assuage
  it, though there was reason to hope that the goodness of her constitution,
  assisted by tranquillity and the kindness of those about her, would
  ultimately surmount it. On the second day she was delirious. On the night of
  that day she was arrested at the suit of Mr. Tyrrel, for a debt contracted
  for board and necessaries for the last fourteen years.
The idea of this arrest, as the reader will perhaps recollect, first
  occurred, in the conversation between Mr. Tyrrel and Miss Melville, soon
  after he had thought proper to confine her to her chamber. But at that time
  he had probably no serious conception of ever being induced to carry it into
  execution. It had merely been mentioned by way of threat, and as the
  suggestion of a mind, whose habits had long been accustomed to contemplate
  every possible instrument of tyranny and revenge. But now, that the
  unlooked-for rescue and escape of his poor kinswoman had wrought up his
  thoughts to a degree of insanity, and that he revolved in the gloomy
  recesses of his mind, how he might best shake off the load of disappointment
  which oppressed him, the idea recurred with double force. He was not long in
  forming his resolution; and, calling for Barnes his steward, immediately
  gave him directions in what manner to proceed.
Barnes had been for several years the instrument of Mr. Tyrrel's
  injustice. His mind was hardened by use, and he could, without remorse,
  officiate as the spectator, or even as the author and director, of a scene
  of vulgar distress. But even he was somewhat startled upon the present
  occasion. The character and conduct of Emily in Mr. Tyrrel's family had been
  without a blot. She had not a single enemy; and it was impossible to
  contemplate her youth, her vivacity, and her guileless innocence, without
  emotions of sympathy and compassion.
"Your worship?—I do not understand you!--Arrest Miss—Miss
  Emily!"
"Yes,—I tell you!--What is the matter with you?—Go instantly
  to Swineard, the lawyer, and bid him finish the business out of hand!"
"Lord love your honour! Arrest her! Why she does not owe you a brass
  farthing: she always lived upon your charity!"
"Ass! Scoundrel! I tell you she does owe me,—owes me eleven hundred
  pounds.—The law justifies it.—What do you think laws were made
  for? I do nothing but right, and right I will have."
"Your honour, I never questioned your orders in my life; but I must now.
  I cannot see you ruin Miss Emily, poor girl! nay, and yourself too, for the
  matter of that, and not say which way you are going. I hope you will bear
  with me. Why, if she owed you ever so much, she cannot be arrested. She is
  not of age."
"Will you have done?—Do not tell me of—It cannot, and It can.
  It has been done before,—and it shall be done again. Let him dispute
  it that dares! I will do it now and stand to it afterwards. Tell
  Swineard,—if he make the least boggling, it is as much as his life is
  worth;—he shall starve by inches."
"Pray, your honour, think better of it. Upon my life, the whole country
  will cry shame of it."
"Barnes!--What do you mean? I am not used to be talked to, and I cannot
  hear it! You have been a good fellow to me upon many occasions—But, if
  I find you out for making one with them that dispute my authority, damn my
  soul, if I do not make you sick of your life!"
"I have done, your honour. I will not say another word except
  this,—I have heard as how that Miss Emily is sick a-bed. You are
  determined, you say, to put her in jail. You do not mean to kill her, I take
  it."
"Let her die! I will not spare her for an hour—I will not always be
  insulted. She had no consideration for me, and I have no mercy for
  her.—I am in for it! They have provoked me past bearing,—and
  they shall feel me! Tell Swineard, in bed or up, day or night, I will not
  hear of an instant's delay."
Such were the directions of Mr. Tyrrel, and in strict conformity to his
  directions were the proceedings of that respectable limb of the law he
  employed upon the present occasion. Miss Melville had been delirious,
  through a considerable part of the day on the evening of which the bailiff
  and his follower arrived. By the direction of the physician whom Mr.
  Falkland had ordered to attend her, a composing draught was administered;
  and, exhausted as she was by the wild and distracted images that for several
  hours had haunted her fancy, she was now sunk into a refreshing slumber.
  Mrs. Hammond, the sister of Mrs. Jakeman, was sitting by her bed-side, full
  of compassion for the lovely sufferer, and rejoicing in the calm
  tranquillity that had just taken possession of her, when a little girl, the
  only child of Mrs. Hammond, opened the street-door to the rap of the bailiff
  He said he wanted to speak with Miss Melville, and the child answered that
  she would go tell her mother. So saying, she advanced to the door of the
  back-room upon the ground-floor, in which Emily lay; but the moment it was
  opened, instead of waiting for the appearance of the mother, the bailiff
  entered along with the girl.
Mrs. Hammond looked up. "Who are you?" said she. "Why do you come in
  here? Hush! be quiet!'
"I must speak with Miss Melville."
"Indeed, but you must not. Tell me your business. The poor child has been
  light-headed all day. She has just fallen asleep, and must not be
  disturbed."
"That is no business of mine. I must obey orders."
"Orders? Whose orders? What is it you mean?"
At this moment Emily opened her eyes. "What noise is that? Pray let me be
  quiet."
"Miss, I want to speak with you. I have got a writ against you for eleven
  hundred pounds at the suit of squire Tyrrel."
At these words both Mrs. Hammond and Emily were dumb. The latter was
  scarcely able to annex any meaning to the intelligence; and, though Mrs.
  Hammond was somewhat better acquainted with the sort of language that was
  employed, yet in this strange and unexpected connection it was almost as
  mysterious to her as to poor Emily herself.
"A writ? How can she be in Mr. Tyrrel's debt? A writ against a
  child!"
"It is no signification putting your questions to us. We only do as we
  are directed. There is our authority. Look at it."
"Lord Almighty!" exclaimed Mrs. Hammond, "what does this mean? It is
  impossible Mr. Tyrrel should have sent you."
"Good woman, none of your jabber to us! Cannot you read?"
"This is all a trick! The paper is forged! It is a vile contrivance to
  get the poor orphan out of the hands of those with whom only she can be
  safe. Proceed upon it at your peril!"
"Rest you content; that is exactly what we mean to do. Take my word, we
  know very well what we are about."
"Why, you would not tear her from her bed? I tell you, she is in a high
  fever; she is light-headed; it would be death to remove her! You are
  bailiffs, are not you? You are not murderers?"
"The law says nothing about that. We have orders to take her sick or
  well. We will do her no harm except so far as we must perform our office, be
  it how it will."
"Where would you take her? What is it you mean to do?"
"To the county jail. Bullock, go, order a post-chaise from the
  Griffin!"
"Stay, I say! Give no such orders! Wait only three hours; I will send off
  a messenger express to squire Falkland, and I am sure he will satisfy you as
  to any harm that can come to you, without its being necessary to take the
  poor child to jail."
"We have particular directions against that. We are not at liberty to
  lose a minute. Why are not you gone? Order the horses to be put to
  immediately!"
Emily had listened to the course of this conversation, which had
  sufficiently explained to her whatever was enigmatical in the first
  appearance of the bailiffs. The painful and incredible reality that was thus
  presented effectually dissipated the illusions of frenzy to which she had
  just been a prey. "My dear Madam," said she to Mrs. Hammond, "do not harass
  yourself with useless efforts. I am very sorry for all the trouble I have
  given you. But my misfortune is inevitable. Sir, if you will step into the
  next room, I will dress myself, and attend you immediately."
Mrs. Hammond began to be equally aware that her struggles were to no
  purpose; but she could not be equally patient. At one moment she raved upon
  the brutality of Mr. Tyrrel, whom she affirmed to be a devil incarnate, and
  not a man. At another she expostulated, with bitter invective, against the
  hardheartedness of the bailiff, and exhorted him to mix some humanity and
  moderation with the discharge of his function; but he was impenetrable to
  all she could urge. In the mean while Emily yielded with the sweetest
  resignation to an inevitable evil. Mrs. Hammond insisted that, at least,
  they should permit her to attend her young lady in the chaise; and the
  bailiff, though the orders he had received were so peremptory that he dared
  not exercise his discretion as to the execution of the writ, began to have
  some apprehensions of danger, and was willing to admit of any precaution
  that was not in direct hostility to his functions. For the rest he
  understood, that it was in all cases dangerous to allow sickness, or
  apparent unfitness for removal, as a sufficient cause to interrupt a direct
  process; and that, accordingly, in all doubtful questions and presumptive
  murders, the practice of the law inclined, with a laudable partiality, to
  the vindication of its own officers. In addition to these general rules, he
  was influenced by the positive injunctions and assurances of Swineard, and
  the terror which, through a circle of many miles, was annexed to the name of
  Tyrrel. Before they departed, Mrs. Hammond despatched a messenger with a
  letter of three lines to Mr. Falkland, informing him of this extraordinary
  event. Mr. Falkland was from home when the messenger arrived, and not
  expected to return till the second day; accident seemed in this instance to
  favour the vengeance of Mr. Tyrrel, for he had himself been too much under
  the dominion of an uncontrollable fury, to take a circumstance of this sort
  into his estimate.
The forlorn state of these poor women, who were conducted, the one by
  compulsion, the other a volunteer, to a scene so little adapted to their
  accommodation as that of a common jail, may easily be imagined. Mrs. Hammond,
  however, was endowed with a masculine courage and impetuosity of spirit,
  eminently necessary in the difficulties they had to encounter. She was in
  some degree fitted by a sanguine temper, and an impassioned sense of
  injustice, for the discharge of those very offices which sobriety and calm
  reflection might have prescribed. The health of Miss Melville was materially
  affected by the surprise and removal she had undergone at the very time that
  repose was most necessary for her preservation. Her fever became more
  violent; her delirium was stronger; and the tortures of her imagination were
  proportioned to the unfavourableness of the state in which the removal had
  been effected. It was highly improbable that she could recover.
In the moments of suspended reason she was perpetually calling on the
  name of Falkland. Mr. Falkland, she said, was her first and only love, and
  he should be her husband. A moment after she exclaimed upon him in a
  disconsolate, yet reproachful tone, for his unworthy deference to the
  prejudices of the world. It was very cruel of him to show himself so proud,
  and tell her that he would never consent to marry a beggar. But, if he were
  proud, she was determined to be proud too. He should see that she would not
  conduct herself like a slighted maiden, and that, though he could reject
  her, it was not in his power to break her heart. At another time she
  imagined she saw Mr. Tyrrel and his engine Grimes, their hands and garments
  dropping with blood: and the pathetic reproaches she vented against them
  might have affected a heart of stone. Then the figure of Falkland presented
  itself to her distracted fancy, deformed with wounds, and of a deadly
  paleness, and she shrieked with agony, while she exclaimed that such was the
  general hardheartedness, that no one would make the smallest exertion for
  his rescue. In such vicissitudes of pain, perpetually imagining to her self
  unkindness, insult, conspiracy, and murder, she passed a considerable part
  of two days.
On the evening of the second Mr. Falkland arrived, accompanied by Doctor
  Wilson, the physician by whom she had previously been attended. The scene he
  was called upon to witness was such as to be most exquisitely agonising to a
  man of his acute sensibility. The news of the arrest had given him an
  inexpressible shock; he was transported out of himself at the unexampled
  malignity of its author. But, when he saw the figure of Miss Melville,
  haggard, and a warrant of death written in her countenance, a victim to the
  diabolical passions of her kinsman, it seemed too much to be endured. When
  he entered, she was in the midst of one of her fits of delirium, and
  immediately mistook her visitors for two assassins. She asked, where they
  had hid her Falkland, her lord, her life, her husband! and demanded that
  they should restore to her his mangled corpse, that she might embrace him
  with her dying arms, breathe her last upon his lips, and be buried in the
  same grave. She reproached them with the sordidness of their conduct in
  becoming the tools of her vile cousin, who had deprived her of her reason,
  and would never be contented till he had murdered her. Mr. Falkland tore
  himself away from this painful scene, and, leaving Doctor Wilson with his
  patient, desired him, when he had given the necessary directions, to follow
  him to his inn.
The perpetual hurry of spirits in which Miss Melville had been kept for
  several days, by the nature of her indisposition, was extremely exhausting
  to her; and, in about an hour from the visit of Mr. Falkland, her delirium
  subsided, and left her in so low a state as to render it difficult to
  perceive any signs of life. Doctor Wilson, who had withdrawn, to soothe, if
  possible, the disturbed and impatient thoughts of Mr. Falkland, was summoned
  afresh upon this change of symptoms, and sat by the bed-side during the
  remainder of the night. The situation of his patient was such, as to keep
  him in momentary apprehension of her decease. While Miss Melville lay in
  this feeble and exhausted condition, Mrs. Hammond betrayed every token of
  the tenderest anxiety. Her sensibility was habitually of the acutest sort,
  and the qualities of Emily were such as powerfully to fix her affection. She
  loved her like a mother. Upon the present occasion, every sound, every
  motion, made her tremble. Doctor Wilson had introduced another nurse, in
  consideration of the incessant fatigue Mrs. Hammond had undergone; and he
  endeavoured, by representations, and even by authority, to compel her to
  quit the apartment of the patient. But she was uncontrollable; and he at
  length found that he should probably do her more injury, by the violence
  that would be necessary to separate her from the suffering innocent, than by
  allowing her to follow her inclination. Her eye was a thousand times turned,
  with the most eager curiosity, upon the countenance of Doctor Wilson,
  without her daring to breathe a question respecting his opinion, lest he
  should answer her by a communication of the most fatal tidings. In the mean
  time she listened with the deepest attention to every thing that dropped
  either from the physician or the nurse, hoping to collect as it were from
  some oblique hint, the intelligence which she had not courage expressly to
  require.
Towards morning the state of the patient seemed to take a favourable
  turn. She dozed for near two hours, and, when she awoke, appeared perfectly
  calm and sensible. Understanding that Mr. Falkland had brought the physician
  to attend her, and was himself in her neighbourhood, she requested to see
  him. Mr. Falkland had gone in the mean time, with one of his tenants, to
  bail the debt, and now entered the prison to enquire whether the young lady
  might be safely removed, from her present miserable residence, to a more
  airy and commodious apartment. When he appeared, the sight of him revived in
  the mind of Miss Melville an imperfect recollection of the wanderings of her
  delirium. She covered her face with her fingers, and betrayed the most
  expressive confusion, while she thanked him, with her usual unaffected
  simplicity, for the trouble he had taken. She hoped she should not give him
  much more; she thought she should get better. It was a shame, she said, if a
  young and lively girl, as she was, could not contrive to outlive the
  trifling misfortunes to which she had been subjected. But, while she said
  this, she was still extremely weak. She tried to assume a cheerful
  countenance; but it was a faint effort, which the feeble state of her frame
  did not seem sufficient to support. Mr. Falkland and the doctor joined to
  request her to keep herself quiet, and avoid for the present all occasions
  of exertion.
Encouraged by these appearances, Mrs. Hammond ventured to follow the two
  gentlemen out of the room, in order to learn from the physician what hopes
  he entertained. Doctor Wilson acknowledged, that he found his patient at
  first in a very unfavourable situation, that the symptoms were changed for
  the better, and that he was not without some expectation of her recovery. He
  added, however, that he could answer for nothing, that the next twelve hours
  would be exceedingly critical, but that if she did not grow worse before
  morning, he would then undertake for her life. Mrs. Hammond, who had
  hitherto seen nothing but despair, now became frantic with joy. She burst
  into tears of transport, blessed the physician in the most emphatic and
  impassioned terms, and uttered a thousand extravagancies. Doctor Wilson
  seized this opportunity to press her to give herself a little repose, to
  which she consented, a bed being first procured for her in the room next to
  Miss Melville's, she having charged the nurse to give her notice of any
  alteration in the state of the patient.
Mrs. Hammond enjoyed an uninterrupted sleep of several hours. It was
  already night, when she was awaked by an unusual bustle in the next room.
  She listened for a few moments, and then determined to go and discover the
  occasion of it. As she opened her door for that purpose, she met the nurse
  coming to her. The countenance of the messenger told her what it was she had
  to communicate, without the use of words. She hurried to the bed-side, and
  found Miss Melville expiring. The appearances that had at first been so
  encouraging were of short duration. The calm of the morning proved to be
  only a sort of lightening before death. In a few hours the patient grew
  worse. The bloom of her countenance faded; she drew her breath with
  difficulty; and her eyes became fixed. Doctor Wilson came in at this period,
  and immediately perceived that all was over. She was for some time in
  convulsions; but, these subsiding, she addressed the physician with a
  composed, though feeble voice. She thanked him for his attention; and
  expressed the most lively sense of her obligations to Mr. Falkland. She
  sincerely forgave her cousin, and hoped he might never be visited by too
  acute a recollection of his barbarity to her. She would have been contented
  to live. Few persons had a sincerer relish of the pleasures of life; but she
  was well pleased to die, rather than have become the wife of Grimes. As Mrs.
  Hammond entered, she turned her countenance towards her, and with an
  affectionate expression repeated her name. This was her last word; in less
  than two hours from that time she breathed her last in the arms of this
  faithful friend.

</div></body></text></TEI>