<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="37">CHAPTER IX.
While I was thus endeavouring to occupy and provide for the intermediate
  period, till the violence of the pursuit after me might be abated, a new
  source of danger opened upon me of which I had no previous suspicion.
Gines, the thief who had been expelled from Captain Raymond's gang, had
  fluctuated, during the last years of his life, between the two professions
  of a violator of the laws and a retainer to their administration. He had
  originally devoted himself to the first; and probably his initiation in the
  mysteries of thieving qualified him to be peculiarly expert in the
  profession of a thief-taker—a profession he had adopted, not from
  choice, but necessity. In this employment his reputation was great, though
  perhaps not equal to his merits; for it happens here as in other departments
  of human society, that, however the subalterns may furnish wisdom and skill,
  the principals exclusively possess the éclat. He was exercising this
  art in a very prosperous manner, when it happened, by some accident, that
  one or two of his achievements previous to his having shaken off the dregs
  of unlicensed depredation were in danger of becoming subjects of public
  attention. Having had repeated intimations of this, he thought it prudent to
  decamp; and it was during this period of his retreat that he entered into
  the ---- gang.
Such was the history of this man antecedently to his being placed in the
  situation in which I had first encountered him. At the time of that
  encounter he was a veteran of Captain Raymond's gang; for thieves being a
  short-lived race, the character of veteran costs the less time in acquiring.
  Upon his expulsion from this community he returned once more to his lawful
  profession, and by his old comrades was received with congratulation as a
  lost sheep. In the vulgar classes of society no length of time is sufficient
  to expiate a crime; but among the honourable fraternity of thief-takers it
  is a rule never to bring one of their own brethren to a reckoning when it
  can with any decency be avoided. They are probably reluctant to fix an
  unnecessary stain upon the ermine of their profession. Another rule observed
  by those who have passed through the same gradation as Gines had done, and
  which was adopted by Gines himself, is always to reserve such as have been
  the accomplices of their depredations to the last, and on no account to
  assail them without great necessity or powerful temptation. For this reason,
  according to Gines's system of tactics, Captain Raymond and his confederates
  were, as he would have termed it, safe from his retaliation.
But, though Gines was, in this sense of the term, a man of strict honour,
  my case unfortunately did not fall within the laws of honour he
  acknowledged. Misfortune had overtaken me, and I was on all sides without
  protection or shelter. The persecution to which I was exposed was founded
  upon the supposition of my having committed felony to an immense amount. But
  in this Gines had had no participation; he was careless whether the
  supposition were true or false, and hated me as much as if my innocence had
  been established beyond the reach of suspicion.
The blood-hunters who had taken me into custody at ----, related, as
  usual among their fraternity, a part of their adventure, and told of the
  reason which inclined them to suppose, that the individual who had passed
  through their custody, was the very Caleb Williams for whose apprehension a
  reward had been offered of a hundred guineas. Gines, whose acuteness was
  eminent in the way of his profession, by comparing facts and dates, was
  induced to suspect in his own mind, that Caleb Williams was the person he
  had hustled and wounded upon ---- forest. Against that person he entertained
  the bitterest aversion. I had been the innocent occasion of his being
  expelled with disgrace from Captain Raymond's gang; and Gines, as I
  afterwards understood, was intimately persuaded that there was no comparison
  between the liberal and manly profession of a robber from which I had driven
  him, and the sordid and mechanical occupation of a blood-hunter, to which he
  was obliged to return. He no sooner received the information I have
  mentioned than he vowed revenge. He determined to leave all other objects,
  and consecrate every faculty of his mind to the unkennelling me from my
  hiding-place. The offered reward, which his vanity made him consider as
  assuredly his own, appeared as the complete indemnification of his labour
  and expense. Thus I had to encounter the sagacity he possessed in the way of
  his profession, whetted and stimulated by a sentiment of vengeance, in a
  mind that knew no restraint from conscience or humanity.
When I drew to myself a picture of my situation soon after having fixed
  on my present abode, I foolishly thought, as the unhappy are accustomed to
  do, that my calamity would admit of no aggravation. The aggravation which,
  unknown to me, at this time occurred was the most fearful that any
  imagination could have devised. Nothing could have happened more critically
  hostile to my future peace, than my fatal encounter with Gines upon ----
  forest. By this means, as it now appears, I had fastened upon myself a
  second enemy, of that singular and dreadful sort that is determined never to
  dismiss its animosity as long as life shall endure. While Falkland was the
  hungry lion whose roarings astonished and appalled me, Gines was a noxious
  insect, scarcely less formidable and tremendous, that hovered about my
  goings, and perpetually menaced me with the poison of his sting.
The first step pursued by him in execution of his project, was to set out
  for the sea-port town where I had formerly been apprehended. From thence he
  traced me to the banks of the Severn, and from the banks of the Severn to
  London. It is scarcely necessary to observe that this is always practicable,
  provided the pursuer have motives strong enough to excite him to
  perseverance, unless the precautions of the fugitive be, in the highest
  degree, both judicious in the conception, and fortunate in the execution.
  Gines indeed, in the course of his pursuit, was often obliged to double his
  steps; and, like the harrier, whenever he was at a fault, return to the
  place where he had last perceived the scent of the animal whose death he had
  decreed. He spared neither pains nor time in the gratification of the
  passion, which choice had made his ruling one.
Upon my arrival in town he for a moment lost all trace of me, London
  being a place in which, on account of the magnitude of its dimensions, it
  might well be supposed that an individual could remain hidden and unknown.
  But no difficulty could discourage this new adversary. He went from inn to
  inn (reasonably supposing that there was no private house to which I could
  immediately repair), till he found, by the description he gave, and the
  recollections he excited, that I had slept for one night in the borough of
  Southwark. But he could get no further information. The people of the inn
  had no knowledge what had become of me the next morning.
This however did but render him more eager in the pursuit. The describing
  me was now more difficult, on account of the partial change of dress I had
  made the second day of my being in town. But Gines at length overcame the
  obstacle from that quarter.
Having traced me to my second inn, he was here furnished with a more
  copious information. I had been a subject of speculation for the leisure
  hours of some of the persons belonging to this inn. An old woman, of a most
  curious and loquacious disposition, who lived opposite to it, and who that
  morning rose early to her washing, had espied me from her window, by the
  light of a large lamp which hung over the inn, as I issued from the gate.
  She had but a very imperfect view of me, but she thought there was something
  Jewish in my appearance. She was accustomed to hold a conference every
  morning with the landlady of the inn, some of the waiters and chambermaids
  occasionally assisting at it. In the course of the dialogue of this morning,
  she asked some questions about the Jew who had slept there the night before.
  No Jew had slept there. The curiosity of the landlady was excited in her
  turn. By the time of the morning it could be no other but me. It was very
  strange! They compared notes respecting my appearance and dress. No two
  things could be more dissimilar. The Jew Christian, upon any dearth of
  subjects of intelligence, repeatedly furnished matter for their
  discourse.
The information thus afforded to Gines appeared exceedingly material. But
  the performance did not for some time keep pace with the promise. He could
  not enter every private house into which lodgers were ever admitted, in the
  same manner that he had treated the inns. He walked the streets, and
  examined with a curious and inquisitive eye the countenance of every Jew
  about my stature; but in vain. He repaired to Duke's Place and the
  synagogues. It was not here that in reality he could calculate upon finding
  me; but he resorted to those means in despair, and as a last hope. He was
  more than once upon the point of giving up the pursuit; but he was recalled
  to it by an insatiable and restless appetite for revenge.
It was during this perturbed and fluctuating state of his mind, that he
  chanced to pay a visit to a brother of his, who was the head-workman of a
  printing-office. There was little intercourse between these two persons,
  their dispositions and habits of life being extremely dissimilar. The
  printer was industrious, sober, inclined to methodism, and of a propensity
  to accumulation. He was extremely dissatisfied with the character and
  pursuits of his brother, and had made some ineffectual attempts to reclaim
  him. But, though they by no means agreed in their habits of thinking, they
  sometimes saw each other. Gines loved to boast of as many of his
  achievements as he dared venture to mention; and his brother was one more
  hearer, in addition to the set of his usual associates. The printer was
  amused with the blunt sagacity of remark and novelty of incident that
  characterised Gines's conversation. He was secretly pleased, in spite of all
  his sober and church-going prejudices, that he was brother to a man of so
  much ingenuity and fortitude.
After having listened for some time upon this occasion to the wonderful
  stories which Gines, in his rugged way, condescended to tell, the printer
  felt an ambition to entertain his brother in his turn. He began to retail
  some of my stories of Cartouche and Gusman d'Alfarache. The attention of
  Gines was excited. His first emotion was wonder; his second was envy and
  aversion. Where did the printer get these stories? This question was
  answered. "I will tell you what," said the printer, "we none of us know what
  to make of the writer of these articles. He writes poetry, and morality, and
  history: I am a printer, and corrector of the press, and may pretend without
  vanity to be a tolerably good judge of these matters: he writes them all to
  my mind extremely fine; and yet he is no more than a Jew." [To my honest
  printer this seemed as strange, as if they had been written by a Cherokee
  chieftain at the falls of the Mississippi.]
"A Jew! How do you know? Did you ever see him?"
"No; the matter is always brought to us by a woman. But my master hates
  mysteries; he likes to see his authors himself. So he plagues and plagues
  the old woman; but he can never get any thing out of her, except that one
  day she happened to drop that the young gentleman was a Jew."
A Jew! a young gentleman! a person who did every thing by proxy, and made
  a secret of all his motions! Here was abundant matter for the speculations
  and suspicions of Gines. He was confirmed in them, without adverting to the
  process of his own mind, by the subject of my lucubrations,—men who
  died by the hand of the executioner. He said little more to his brother,
  except asking, as if casually, what sort of an old woman this was? of what
  age she might be? and whether she often brought him materials of this kind?
  and soon after took occasion to leave him. It was with vast pleasure that
  Gines had listened to this unhoped-for information. Having collected from
  his brother sufficient hints relative to the person and appearance of Mrs.
  Marney, and understanding that he expected to receive something from me the
  next day, Gines took his stand in the street early, that he might not risk
  miscarriage by negligence. He waited several hours, but not without success.
  Mrs. Marney came; he watched her into the house; and after about twenty
  minutes delay, saw her return. He dogged her from street to street; observed
  her finally enter the door of a private house; and congratulated himself
  upon having at length arrived at the consummation of his labours.
The house she entered was not her own habitation. By a sort of miraculous
  accident she had observed Gines following her in the street. As she went
  home she saw a woman who had fallen down in a fainting fit. Moved by the
  compassion that was ever alive in her, she approached her, in order to
  render her assistance. Presently a crowd collected round them. Mrs. Marney,
  having done what she was able, once more proceeded homewards. Observing the
  crowd round her, the idea of pickpockets occurred to her mind; she put her
  hands to her sides, and at the same time looked round upon the populace. She
  had left the circle somewhat abruptly; and Gines, who had been obliged to
  come nearer, lest he should lose her in the confusion, was at that moment
  standing exactly opposite to her. His visage was of the most extraordinary
  kind; habit had written the characters of malignant cunning and dauntless
  effrontery in every line of his face; and Mrs. Marney, who was neither
  philosopher nor physiognomist, was nevertheless struck. This good woman,
  like most persons of her notable character, had a peculiar way of going
  home, not through the open streets, but by narrow lanes and alleys, with
  intricate insertions and sudden turnings. In one of these, by some accident,
  she once again caught a glance of her pursuer. This circumstance, together
  with the singularity of his appearance, awakened her conjectures. Could he
  be following her? It was the middle of the day, and she could have no fears
  for herself. But could this circumstance have any reference to me? She
  recollected the precautions and secrecy I practised, and had no doubt that I
  had reasons for what I did. She recollected that she had always been upon
  her guard respecting me; but had she been sufficiently so? She thought that,
  if she should be the means of any mischief to me, she should be miserable
  for ever. She determined therefore, by way of precaution in case of the
  worst, to call at a friend's house, and send me word of what had occurred.
  Having instructed her friend, she went out immediately upon a visit to a
  person in the exactly opposite direction, and desired her friend to proceed
  upon the errand to me, five minutes after she left the house. By this
  prudence she completely extricated me from the present danger.
Meantime the intelligence that was brought me by no means ascertained the
  greatness of the peril. For any thing I could discover in it the
  circumstance might be perfectly innocent, and the fear solely proceed from
  the over-caution and kindness of this benevolent and excellent woman. Yet,
  such was the misery of my situation, I had no choice. For this menace or no
  menace, I was obliged to desert my habitation at a minute's warning, taking
  with me nothing but what I could carry in my hand; to see my generous
  benefactress no more; to quit my little arrangements and provision; and to
  seek once again, in some forlorn retreat, new projects, and, if of that I
  could have any rational hope, a new friend. I descended into the street with
  a heavy, not an irresolute heart. It was broad day. I said, persons are at
  this moment supposed to be roaming the street in search of me: I must not
  trust to the chance of their pursuing one direction, and I another. I
  traversed half a dozen streets, and then dropped into an obscure house of
  entertainment for persons of small expense. In this house I took some
  refreshment, passed several hours of active but melancholy thinking, and at
  last procured a bed. As soon however as it was dark I went out (for this was
  indispensable) to purchase the materials of a new disguise. Having adjusted
  it as well as I could during the night, I left this asylum, with the same
  precautions that I had employed in former instances.

</div></body></text></TEI>