<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Caleb Williams; Or, Things as They Are</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>B. Crosby</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1794</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="30">CHAPTER II.
In this woeful situation, though extremely weak, I was not deprived of
  sense. I tore my shirt from my naked body, and endeavoured, with some
  success, to make of it a bandage to staunch the flowing of the blood. I then
  exerted myself to crawl up the side of the ditch. I had scarcely effected
  the latter, when, with equal surprise and joy, I perceived a man advancing
  at no great distance. I called for help as well as I could. The man came
  towards me with evident signs of compassion, and the appearance I exhibited
  was indeed sufficiently calculated to excite it. I had no hat. My hair was
  dishevelled, and the ends of the locks clotted with blood. My shirt was
  wrapped about my neck and shoulders, and was plentifully stained with red.
  My body, which was naked to my middle, was variegated with streams of blood;
  nor had my lower garments, which were white, by any means escaped.
"For God's sake, my good fellow!" said he, with a tone of the greatest
  imaginable kindness, "how came you thus?" and, saying this, he lifted me up,
  and set me on my feet. "Can you stand?" added he, doubtfully. "Oh, yes, very
  well," I replied. Having received this answer, he quitted me, and began to
  take off his own coat, that he might cover me from the cold. I had however
  over-rated my strength, and was no sooner left to myself than I reeled, and
  fell almost at my length upon the ground. But I broke my fall by stretching
  out my sound arm, and again raised myself upon my knees. My benefactor now
  covered me, raised me, and, bidding me lean upon him, told me he would
  presently conduct me to a place where I should be taken care of. Courage is
  a capricious property; and, though while I had no one to depend upon but
  myself, I possessed a mine of seemingly inexhaustible fortitude, yet no
  sooner did I find this unexpected sympathy on the part of another, than my
  resolution appeared to give way, and I felt ready to faint. My charitable
  conductor perceived this, and every now and then encouraged me, in a manner
  so cheerful, so good humoured and benevolent, equally free from the torture
  of droning expostulation, and the weakness of indulgence, that I thought
  myself under the conduct of an angel rather than a man. I could perceive
  that his behaviour had in it nothing of boorishness, and that he was
  thoroughly imbued with the principles of affectionate civility.
We walked about three quarters of a mile, and that not towards the open,
  but the most uncouth and unfrequented part of the forest. We crossed a place
  which had once been a moat, but which was now in some parts dry, and in
  others contained a little muddy and stagnated water. Within the enclosure of
  this moat, I could only discover a pile of ruins, and several walls, the
  upper part of which seemed to overhang their foundations, and to totter to
  their ruin. After having entered however with my conductor through an
  archway, and passed along a winding passage that was perfectly dark, we came
  to a stand.
At the upper end of this passage was a door, which I was unable to
  perceive. My conductor knocked at the door, and was answered by a voice from
  within, which, for body and force, might have been the voice of a man, but
  with a sort of female sharpness and acidity, enquiring, "Who is there?"
  Satisfaction was no sooner given on this point, than I heard two bolts
  pushed back, and the door unlocked. The apartment opened, and we entered.
  The interior of this habitation by no means corresponded with the appearance
  of my protector, but, on the contrary, wore the face of discomfort,
  carelessness, and dirt. The only person I saw within was a woman, rather
  advanced in life, and whose person had I know not what of extraordinary and
  loathsome. Her eyes were red and blood-shot; her hair was pendent in matted
  and shaggy tresses about her shoulders; her complexion swarthy, and of the
  consistency of parchment; her form spare, and her whole body, her arms in
  particular, uncommonly vigorous and muscular. Not the milk of human
  kindness, but the feverous blood of savage ferocity, seemed to flow from her
  heart; and her whole figure suggested an idea of unmitigable energy, and an
  appetite gorged in malevolence. This infernal Thalestris had no sooner cast
  her eyes upon us as we entered, than she exclaimed in a discordant and
  discontented voice, "What have we got here? this is not one of our people!"
  My conductor, without answering this apostrophe, bade her push an easy chair
  which stood in one corner, and set it directly before the fire. This she did
  with apparent reluctance, murmuring, "Ah! you are at your old tricks; I
  wonder what such folks as we have to do with charity! It will be the ruin of
  us at last, I can see that!"—"Hold your tongue, beldam!" said he, with
  a stern significance of manner, "and fetch one of my best shirts, a
  waistcoat, and some dressings." Saying this, he at the same time put into
  her hand a small bunch of keys. In a word, he treated me with as much
  kindness as if he had been my father. He examined my wound, washed and
  dressed it; at the same time that the old woman, by his express order,
  prepared for me such nourishment as he thought most suitable to my weak and
  languid condition.
These operations were no sooner completed than my benefactor recommended
  to me to retire to rest, and preparations were making for that purpose, when
  suddenly a trampling of feet was heard, succeeded by a knock at the door.
  The old woman opened the door with the same precautions as had been employed
  upon our arrival, and immediately six or seven persons tumultuously entered
  the apartment. Their appearance was different, some having the air of mere
  rustics, and others that of a tarnished sort of gentry. All had a feature of
  boldness, inquietude, and disorder, extremely unlike any thing I had before
  observed in such a group. But my astonishment was still increased, when upon
  a second glance I perceived something in the general air of several of them,
  and of one in particular, that persuaded me they were the gang from which I
  had just escaped, and this one the antagonist by whose animosity I was so
  near having been finally destroyed. I imagined they had entered the hovel
  with a hostile intention, that my benefactor was upon the point of being
  robbed, and I probably murdered.
This suspicion however was soon removed. They addressed my conductor with
  respect, under the appellation of captain. They were boisterous and noisy in
  their remarks and exclamations, but their turbulence was tempered by a
  certain deference to his opinion and authority. I could observe in the
  person who had been my active opponent some awkwardness and irresolution as
  he first perceived me, which he dismissed with a sort of effort, exclaiming,
  "Who the devil is here?" There was something in the tone of this apostrophe
  that roused the attention of my protector. He looked at the speaker with a
  fixed and penetrating glance, and then said, "Nay, Gines, do you know? Did
  you ever see the person before?"—"Curse it, Gines!" interrupted a
  third, "you are damnably out of luck. They say dead men walk, and you see
  there is some truth in it."—"Truce with your impertinence, Jeckols!"
  replied my protector: "this is no proper occasion for a joke. Answer me,
  Gines, were you the cause of this young man being left naked and wounded
  this bitter morning upon the forest?"
"Mayhap I was. What then?"
"What provocation could induce you to so cruel a treatment?"
"Provocation enough. He had no money."
"What, did you use him thus, without so much as being irritated by any
  resistance on his part?"
"Yes, he did resist. I only hustled him, and he had the impudence to
  strike me."
"Gines! you are an incorrigible fellow."
"Pooh, what signifies what I am? You, with your compassion, and your fine
  feelings, will bring us all to the gallows."
"I have nothing to say to you; I have no hopes of you! Comrades, it is
  for you to decide upon the conduct of this man as you think proper. You know
  how repeated his offences have been; you know what pains I have taken to
  mend him. Our profession is the profession of justice." [It is thus that the
  prejudices of men universally teach them to colour the most desperate cause
  to which they have determined to adhere.] "We, who are thieves without a
  licence, are at open war with another set of men who are thieves according
  to law. With such a cause then to bear us out, shall we stain it with
  cruelty, malice, and revenge? A thief is, of course, a man living among his
  equals; I do not pretend therefore to assume any authority among you; act as
  you think proper; but, so far as relates to myself, I vote that Gines be
  expelled from among us as a disgrace to our society."
This proposition seemed to meet the general sense. It was easy to
  perceive that the opinion of the rest coincided with that of their leader;
  notwithstanding which a few of them hesitated as to the conduct to be
  pursued. In the mean time Gines muttered something in a surly and irresolute
  way, about taking care how they provoked him. This insinuation instantly
  roused the courage of my protector, and his eyes flashed with contempt.
"Rascal!" said he, "do you menace us? Do you think we will be your
  slaves? No, no, do your worst! Go to the next justice of the peace, and
  impeach us; I can easily believe you are capable of it. Sir, when we entered
  into this gang, we were not such fools as not to know that we entered upon a
  service of danger. One of its dangers consists in the treachery of fellows
  like you. But we did not enter at first to flinch now. Did you believe that
  we would live in hourly fear of you, tremble at your threats, and
  compromise, whenever you should so please, with your insolence? That would
  be a blessed life indeed! I would rather see my flesh torn piecemeal from my
  bones! Go, sir! I defy you! You dare not do it! You dare not sacrifice these
  gallant fellows to your rage, and publish yourself to all the world a
  traitor and a scoundrel! If you do, you will punish yourself, not us!
  Begone!"
The intrepidity of the leader communicated itself to the rest of the
  company. Gines easily saw that there was no hope of bringing them over to a
  contrary sentiment. After a short pause, he answered, "I did not
  mean—No, damn it! I will not snivel neither. I was always true to my
  principles, and a friend to you all. But since you are resolved to turn me
  out, why—good bye to you!"
The expulsion of this man produced a remarkable improvement in the whole
  gang. Those who were before inclined to humanity, assumed new energy in
  proportion as they saw such sentiments likely to prevail. They had before
  suffered themselves to be overborne by the boisterous insolence of their
  antagonist; but now they adopted, and with success, a different conduct.
  Those who envied the ascendancy of their comrade, and therefore imitated his
  conduct, began to hesitate in their career. Stories were brought forward of
  the cruelty and brutality of Gines both to men and animals, which had never
  before reached the ear of the leader. The stories I shall not repeat. They
  could excite only emotions of abhorrence and disgust; and some of them
  argued a mind of such a stretch of depravity, as to many readers would
  appear utterly incredible; and yet this man had his virtues. He was
  enterprising, persevering, and faithful.
His removal was a considerable benefit to me. It would have been no small
  hardship to have been turned adrift immediately under my unfavourable
  circumstances, with the additional disadvantage of the wound I had received;
  and yet I could scarcely have ventured to remain under the same roof with a
  man, to whom my appearance was as a guilty conscience, perpetually reminding
  him of his own offence, and the displeasure of his leader. His profession
  accustomed him to a certain degree of indifference to consequences, and
  indulgence to the sallies of passion; and he might easily have found his
  opportunity to insult or injure me, when I should have had nothing but my
  own debilitated exertions to protect me.
Freed from this danger, I found my situation sufficiently fortunate for a
  man under my circumstances. It was attended with all the advantages for
  concealment my fondest imagination could have hoped; and it was by no means
  destitute of the benefits which arise from kindness and humanity. Nothing
  could be more unlike than the thieves I had seen in ---- jail, and the
  thieves of my new residence. The latter were generally full of cheerfulness
  and merriment. They could expatiate freely wherever they thought proper.
  They could form plans and execute them. They consulted their inclinations.
  They did not impose upon themselves the task, as is too often the case in
  human society, of seeming tacitly to approve that from which they suffered
  most; or, which is worst, of persuading themselves that all the wrongs they
  suffered were right; but were at open war with their oppressors. On the
  contrary, the imprisoned felons I had lately seen were shut up like wild
  beasts in a cage, deprived of activity, and palsied with indolence. The
  occasional demonstrations that still remained of their former enterprising
  life were the starts and convulsions of disease, not the meditated and
  consistent exertions of a mind in health. They had no more of hope, of
  project, of golden and animated dreams, but were reserved to the most dismal
  prospects, and forbidden to think upon any other topic. It is true, that
  these two scenes were parts of one whole, the one the consummation, the
  hourly to be expected successor of the other. But the men I now saw were
  wholly inattentive to this, and in that respect appeared to hold no commerce
  with reflection or reason.
I might in one view, as I have said, congratulate myself upon my present
  residence; it answered completely the purposes of concealment. It was the
  seat of merriment and hilarity; but the hilarity that characterised it
  produced no correspondent feelings in my bosom. The persons who composed
  this society had each of them cast off all control from established
  principle; their trade was terror, and their constant object to elude the
  vigilance of the community. The influence of these circumstances was visible
  in their character. I found among them benevolence and kindness: they were
  strongly susceptible of emotions of generosity. But, as their situation was
  precarious, their dispositions were proportionably fluctuating. Inured to
  the animosity of their species, they were irritable and passionate.
  Accustomed to exercise harshness towards the subject of their depredations,
  they did not always confine their brutality within that scope. They were
  habituated to consider wounds and bludgeons and stabbing as the obvious mode
  of surmounting every difficulty. Uninvolved in the debilitating routine of
  human affairs, they frequently displayed an energy which, from every
  impartial observer, would have extorted veneration. Energy is perhaps of all
  qualities the most valuable; and a just political system would possess the
  means of extracting from it, thus circumstanced, its beneficial qualities,
  instead of consigning it, as now, to indiscriminate destruction. We act like
  the chemist, who should reject the finest ore, and employ none but what was
  sufficiently debased to fit it immediately for the vilest uses. But the
  energy of these men, such as I beheld it, was in the highest degree
  misapplied, unassisted by liberal and enlightened views, and directed only
  to the most narrow and contemptible purposes.
The residence I have been describing might to many persons have appeared
  attended with intolerable inconveniences. But, exclusively of its advantages
  as a field for speculation, it was Elysium, compared with that from which I
  had just escaped. Displeasing company, incommodious apartments, filthiness,
  and riot, lost the circumstance by which they could most effectually
  disgust, when I was not compelled to remain with them. All hardships I could
  patiently endure, in comparison with the menace of a violent and untimely
  death. There was no suffering that I could not persuade myself to consider
  as trivial, except that which flowed from the tyranny, the frigid
  precaution, or the inhuman revenge of my own species.
My recovery advanced in the most favourable manner. The attention and
  kindness of my protector were incessant, and the rest caught the spirit from
  his example. The old woman who superintended the household still retained
  her animosity. She considered me as the cause of the expulsion of Gines from
  the fraternity. Gines had been the object of her particular partiality; and,
  zealous as she was for the public concern, she thought an old and
  experienced sinner for a raw probationer but an ill exchange. Add to which,
  that her habits inclined her to moroseness and discontent, and that persons
  of her complexion seem unable to exist without some object upon which to
  pour out the superfluity of their gall. She lost no opportunity, upon the
  most trifling occasion, of displaying her animosity; and ever and anon eyed
  me with a furious glance of canine hunger for my destruction. Nothing was
  more evidently mortifying to her, than the procrastination of her malice;
  nor could she bear to think that a fierceness so gigantic and uncontrollable
  should show itself in nothing more terrific than the pigmy spite of a
  chambermaid. For myself, I had been accustomed to the warfare of formidable
  adversaries, and the encounter of alarming dangers; and what I saw of her
  spleen had not power sufficient to disturb my tranquillity.
As I recovered, I told my story, except so far as related to the
  detection of Mr. Falkland's eventful secret, to my protector. That
  particular I could not, as yet, prevail upon myself to disclose, even in a
  situation like this, which seemed to preclude the possibility of its being
  made use of to the disadvantage of my persecutor. My present auditor
  however, whose habits of thinking were extremely opposite to those of Mr.
  Forester, did not, from the obscurity which flowed from this reserve, deduce
  any unfavourable conclusion. His penetration was such, as to afford little
  room for an impostor to hope to mislead him by a fictitious statement, and
  he confided in that penetration. So confiding, the simplicity and integrity
  of my manner carried conviction to his mind, and insured his good opinion
  and friendship.
He listened to my story with eagerness, and commented on the several
  parts as I related them. He said, that this was only one fresh instance of
  the tyranny and perfidiousness exercised by the powerful members of the
  community, against those who were less privileged than themselves. Nothing
  could be more clear, than their readiness to sacrifice the human species at
  large to their meanest interest, or wildest caprice. Who that saw the
  situation in its true light would wait till their oppressors thought fit to
  decree their destruction, and not take arms in their defence while it was
  yet in their power? Which was most meritorious, the unresisting and
  dastardly submission of a slave, or the enterprise and gallantry of the man
  who dared to assert his claims? Since, by the partial administration of our
  laws, innocence, when power was armed against it, had nothing better to hope
  for than guilt, what man of true courage would fail to set these laws at
  defiance, and, if he must suffer by their injustice, at least take care that
  he had first shown his contempt of their yoke? For himself, he should
  certainly never have embraced his present calling, had he not been
  stimulated to it by these cogent and irresistible reasons; and he hoped, as
  experience had so forcibly brought a conviction of this sort to my mind,
  that he should for the future have the happiness to associate me to his
  pursuits.—It will presently be seen with what event these hopes were
  attended.
Numerous were the precautions exercised by the gang of thieves with whom
  I now resided, to elude the vigilance of the satellites of justice. It was
  one of their rules to commit no depredations but at a considerable distance
  from the place of their residence; and Gines had transgressed this
  regulation in the attack to which I was indebted for my present asylum.
  After having possessed themselves of any booty, they took care, in the sight
  of the persons whom they had robbed, to pursue a route as nearly as possible
  opposite to that which led to their true haunts. The appearance of their
  place of residence, together with its environs, was peculiarly desolate and
  forlorn, and it had the reputation of being haunted. The old woman I have
  described had long been its inhabitant, and was commonly supposed to be its
  only inhabitant; and her person well accorded with the rural ideas of a
  witch. Her lodgers never went out or came in but with the utmost
  circumspection, and generally by night. The lights which were occasionally
  seen from various parts of her habitation, were, by the country people,
  regarded with horror as supernatural; and if the noise of revelry at any
  time saluted their ears, it was imagined to proceed from a carnival of
  devils. With all these advantages, the thieves did not venture to reside
  here but by intervals: they frequently absented themselves for months, and
  removed to a different part of the country. The old woman sometimes attended
  them in these transportations, and sometimes remained; but in all cases her
  decampment took place either sooner or later than theirs, so that the nicest
  observer could scarcely have traced any connection between her reappearance,
  and the alarms of depredation that were frequently given; and the festival
  of demons seemed, to the terrified rustics, indifferently to take place
  whether she were present or absent.

</div></body></text></TEI>