<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Maria; Or, The Wrongs of Woman</title><author>Wollstonecraft, Mary (1759-1797)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Joseph Johnson</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1798</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="2">

CHAPTER 2

Earnestly as Maria endeavoured to soothe, by reading, the anguish of her
wounded mind, her thoughts would often wander from the subject she was led to
discuss, and tears of maternal tenderness obscured the reasoning page. She
descanted on “the ills which flesh is heir to,” with bitterness, when the
recollection of her babe was revived by a tale of fictitious woe, that bore any
resemblance to her own; and her imagination was continually employed, to
conjure up and embody the various phantoms of misery, which folly and vice had
let loose on the world. The loss of her babe was the tender string; against
other cruel remembrances she laboured to steel her bosom; and even a ray of
hope, in the midst of her gloomy reveries, would sometimes gleam on the dark
horizon of futurity, while persuading herself that she ought to cease to hope,
since happiness was no where to be found.—But of her child, debilitated by the
grief with which its mother had been assailed before it saw the light, she
could not think without an impatient struggle.


“I, alone, by my active tenderness, could have saved,” she would exclaim, “from
an early blight, this sweet blossom; and, cherishing it, I should have had
something still to love.”


In proportion as other expectations were torn from her, this tender one had
been fondly clung to, and knit into her heart.


The books she had obtained, were soon devoured, by one who had no other
resource to escape from sorrow, and the feverish dreams of ideal wretchedness
or felicity, which equally weaken the intoxicated sensibility. Writing was then
the only alternative, and she wrote some rhapsodies descriptive of the state of
her mind; but the events of her past life pressing on her, she resolved
circumstantially to relate them, with the sentiments that experience, and more
matured reason, would naturally suggest. They might perhaps instruct her
daughter, and shield her from the misery, the tyranny, her mother knew not how
to avoid.


This thought gave life to her diction, her soul flowed into it, and she soon
found the task of recollecting almost obliterated impressions very interesting.
She lived again in the revived emotions of youth, and forgot her present in the
retrospect of sorrows that had assumed an unalterable character.


Though this employment lightened the weight of time, yet, never losing sight of
her main object, Maria did not allow any opportunity to slip of winning on the
affections of Jemima; for she discovered in her a strength of mind, that
excited her esteem, clouded as it was by the misanthropy of despair.


An insulated being, from the misfortune of her birth, she despised and preyed
on the society by which she had been oppressed, and loved not her
fellow-creatures, because she had never been beloved. No mother had ever
fondled her, no father or brother had protected her from outrage; and the man
who had plunged her into infamy, and deserted her when she stood in greatest
need of support, deigned not to smooth with kindness the road to ruin. Thus
degraded, was she let loose on the world; and virtue, never nurtured by
affection, assumed the stern aspect of selfish independence.


This general view of her life, Maria gathered from her exclamations and dry
remarks. Jemima indeed displayed a strange mixture of interest and suspicion;
for she would listen to her with earnestness, and then suddenly interrupt the
conversation, as if afraid of resigning, by giving way to her sympathy, her
dear-bought knowledge of the world.


Maria alluded to the possibility of an escape, and mentioned a compensation, or
reward; but the style in which she was repulsed made her cautious, and
determine not to renew the subject, till she knew more of the character she had
to work on. Jemima’s countenance, and dark hints, seemed to say, “You are an
extraordinary woman; but let me consider, this may only be one of your lucid
intervals.” Nay, the very energy of Maria’s character, made her suspect that
the extraordinary animation she perceived might be the effect of madness.
“Should her husband then substantiate his charge, and get possession of her
estate, from whence would come the promised annuity, or more desired
protection? Besides, might not a woman, anxious to escape, conceal some of the
circumstances which made against her? Was truth to be expected from one who had
been entrapped, kidnapped, in the most fraudulent manner?”


In this train Jemima continued to argue, the moment after compassion and
respect seemed to make her swerve; and she still resolved not to be wrought on
to do more than soften the rigour of confinement, till she could advance on
surer ground.


Maria was not permitted to walk in the garden; but sometimes, from her window,
she turned her eyes from the gloomy walls, in which she pined life away, on the
poor wretches who strayed along the walks, and contemplated the most terrific
of ruins—that of a human soul. What is the view of the fallen column, the
mouldering arch, of the most exquisite workmanship, when compared with this
living memento of the fragility, the instability, of reason, and the wild
luxuriancy of noxious passions? Enthusiasm turned adrift, like some rich stream
overflowing its banks, rushes forward with destructive velocity, inspiring a
sublime concentration of thought. Thus thought Maria—These are the ravages over
which humanity must ever mournfully ponder, with a degree of anguish not
excited by crumbling marble, or cankering brass, unfaithful to the trust of
monumental fame. It is not over the decaying productions of the mind, embodied
with the happiest art, we grieve most bitterly. The view of what has been done
by man, produces a melancholy, yet aggrandizing, sense of what remains to be
achieved by human intellect; but a mental convulsion, which, like the
devastation of an earthquake, throws all the elements of thought and
imagination into confusion, makes contemplation giddy, and we fearfully ask on
what ground we ourselves stand.


Melancholy and imbecility marked the features of the wretches allowed to
breathe at large; for the frantic, those who in a strong imagination had lost a
sense of woe, were closely confined. The playful tricks and mischievous devices
of their disturbed fancy, that suddenly broke out, could not be guarded
against, when they were permitted to enjoy any portion of freedom; for, so
active was their imagination, that every new object which accidentally struck
their senses, awoke to phrenzy their restless passions; as Maria learned from
the burden of their incessant ravings.


Sometimes, with a strict injunction of silence, Jemima would allow Maria, at
the close of evening, to stray along the narrow avenues that separated the
dungeon-like apartments, leaning on her arm. What a change of scene! Maria
wished to pass the threshold of her prison, yet, when by chance she met the eye
of rage glaring on her, yet unfaithful to its office, she shrunk back with more
horror and affright, than if she had stumbled over a mangled corpse. Her busy
fancy pictured the misery of a fond heart, watching over a friend thus
estranged, absent, though present—over a poor wretch lost to reason and the
social joys of existence; and losing all consciousness of misery in its excess.
What a task, to watch the light of reason quivering in the eye, or with
agonizing expectation to catch the beam of recollection; tantalized by hope,
only to feel despair more keenly, at finding a much loved face or voice,
suddenly remembered, or pathetically implored, only to be immediately
forgotten, or viewed with indifference or abhorrence!


The heart-rending sigh of melancholy sunk into her soul; and when she retired
to rest, the petrified figures she had encountered, the only human forms she
was doomed to observe, haunting her dreams with tales of mysterious wrongs,
made her wish to sleep to dream no more.


Day after day rolled away, and tedious as the present moment appeared, they
passed in such an unvaried tenor, Maria was surprised to find that she had
already been six weeks buried alive, and yet had such faint hopes of effecting
her enlargement. She was, earnestly as she had sought for employment, now angry
with herself for having been amused by writing her narrative; and grieved to
think that she had for an instant thought of any thing, but contriving to
escape.


Jemima had evidently pleasure in her society: still, though she often left her
with a glow of kindness, she returned with the same chilling air; and, when her
heart appeared for a moment to open, some suggestion of reason forcibly closed
it, before she could give utterance to the confidence Maria’s conversation
inspired.


Discouraged by these changes, Maria relapsed into despondency, when she was
cheered by the alacrity with which Jemima brought her a fresh parcel of books;
assuring her, that she had taken some pains to obtain them from one of the
keepers, who attended a gentleman confined in the opposite corner of the
gallery.


Maria took up the books with emotion. “They come,” said she, “perhaps, from a
wretch condemned, like me, to reason on the nature of madness, by having
wrecked minds continually under his eye; and almost to wish himself—as I
do—mad, to escape from the contemplation of it.” Her heart throbbed with
sympathetic alarm; and she turned over the leaves with awe, as if they had
become sacred from passing through the hands of an unfortunate being, oppressed
by a similar fate.


Dryden’s Fables, Milton’s Paradise Lost, with several modern productions,
composed the collection. It was a mine of treasure. Some marginal notes, in
Dryden’s Fables, caught her attention: they were written with force and taste;
and, in one of the modern pamphlets, there was a fragment left, containing
various observations on the present state of society and government, with a
comparative view of the politics of Europe and America. These remarks were
written with a degree of generous warmth, when alluding to the enslaved state
of the labouring majority, perfectly in unison with Maria’s mode of thinking.


She read them over and over again; and fancy, treacherous fancy, began to
sketch a character, congenial with her own, from these shadowy outlines.—“Was
he mad?” She reperused the marginal notes, and they seemed the production of an
animated, but not of a disturbed imagination. Confined to this speculation,
every time she re-read them, some fresh refinement of sentiment, or acuteness
of thought impressed her, which she was astonished at herself for not having
before observed.


What a creative power has an affectionate heart! There are beings who cannot
live without loving, as poets love; and who feel the electric spark of genius,
wherever it awakens sentiment or grace. Maria had often thought, when
disciplining her wayward heart, “that to charm, was to be virtuous.” “They who
make me wish to appear the most amiable and good in their eyes, must possess in
a degree,” she would exclaim, “the graces and virtues they call into action.”


She took up a book on the powers of the human mind; but, her attention strayed
from cold arguments on the nature of what she felt, while she was feeling, and
she snapt the chain of the theory to read Dryden’s Guiscard and Sigismunda.


Maria, in the course of the ensuing day, returned some of the books, with the
hope of getting others—and more marginal notes. Thus shut out from human
intercourse, and compelled to view nothing but the prison of vexed spirits, to
meet a wretch in the same situation, was more surely to find a friend, than to
imagine a countryman one, in a strange land, where the human voice conveys no
information to the eager ear.


“Did you ever see the unfortunate being to whom these books belong?” asked
Maria, when Jemima brought her slipper. “Yes. He sometimes walks out, between
five and six, before the family is stirring, in the morning, with two keepers;
but even then his hands are confined.”


“What! is he so unruly?” enquired Maria, with an accent of disappointment.


“No, not that I perceive,” replied Jemima; “but he has an untamed look, a
vehemence of eye, that excites apprehension. Were his hands free, he looks as
if he could soon manage both his guards: yet he appears tranquil.”


“If he be so strong, he must be young,” observed Maria.


“Three or four and thirty, I suppose; but there is no judging of a person in
his situation.”


“Are you sure that he is mad?” interrupted Maria with eagerness. Jemima quitted
the room, without replying.


“No, no, he certainly is not!” exclaimed Maria, answering herself; “the man who
could write those observations was not disordered in his intellects.”


She sat musing, gazing at the moon, and watching its motion as it seemed to
glide under the clouds. Then, preparing for bed, she thought, “Of what use
could I be to him, or he to me, if it be true that he is unjustly
confined?—Could he aid me to escape, who is himself more closely watched?—Still
I should like to see him.” She went to bed, dreamed of her child, yet woke
exactly at half after five o’clock, and starting up, only wrapped a gown around
her, and ran to the window. The morning was chill, it was the latter end of
September; yet she did not retire to warm herself and think in bed, till the
sound of the servants, moving about the house, convinced her that the unknown
would not walk in the garden that morning. She was ashamed at feeling
disappointed; and began to reflect, as an excuse to herself, on the little
objects which attract attention when there is nothing to divert the mind; and
how difficult it was for women to avoid growing romantic, who have no active
duties or pursuits.


At breakfast, Jemima enquired whether she understood French? for, unless she
did, the stranger’s stock of books was exhausted. Maria replied in the
affirmative; but forbore to ask any more questions respecting the person to
whom they belonged. And Jemima gave her a new subject for contemplation, by
describing the person of a lovely maniac, just brought into an adjoining
chamber. She was singing the pathetic ballad of old Rob[3] with the most heart-melting falls and pauses.
Jemima had half-opened the door, when she distinguished her voice, and Maria
stood close to it, scarcely daring to respire, lest a modulation should escape
her, so exquisitely sweet, so passionately wild. She began with sympathy to
pourtray to herself another victim, when the lovely warbler flew, as it were,
from the spray, and a torrent of unconnected exclamations and questions burst
from her, interrupted by fits of laughter, so horrid, that Maria shut the door,
and, turning her eyes up to heaven, exclaimed—“Gracious God!”


 [3]
A blank space about ten characters in length occurs here in the original
edition [Publisher’s note].


Several minutes elapsed before Maria could enquire respecting the rumour of the
house (for this poor wretch was obviously not confined without a cause); and
then Jemima could only tell her, that it was said, “she had been married,
against her inclination, to a rich old man, extremely jealous (no wonder, for
she was a charming creature); and that, in consequence of his treatment, or
something which hung on her mind, she had, during her first lying-in, lost her
senses.”


What a subject of meditation—even to the very confines of madness.


“Woman, fragile flower! why were you suffered to adorn a world exposed to the
inroad of such stormy elements?” thought Maria, while the poor maniac’s strain
was still breathing on her ear, and sinking into her very soul.


Towards the evening, Jemima brought her Rousseau’s Heloise; and she sat reading
with eyes and heart, till the return of her guard to extinguish the light. One
instance of her kindness was, the permitting Maria to have one, till her own
hour of retiring to rest. She had read this work long since; but now it seemed
to open a new world to her—the only one worth inhabiting. Sleep was not to be
wooed; yet, far from being fatigued by the restless rotation of thought, she
rose and opened her window, just as the thin watery clouds of twilight made the
long silent shadows visible. The air swept across her face with a voluptuous
freshness that thrilled to her heart, awakening indefinable emotions; and the
sound of a waving branch, or the twittering of a startled bird, alone broke the
stillness of reposing nature. Absorbed by the sublime sensibility which renders
the consciousness of existence felicity, Maria was happy, till an autumnal
scent, wafted by the breeze of morn from the fallen leaves of the adjacent
wood, made her recollect that the season had changed since her confinement; yet
life afforded no variety to solace an afflicted heart. She returned dispirited
to her couch, and thought of her child till the broad glare of day again
invited her to the window. She looked not for the unknown, still how great was
her vexation at perceiving the back of a man, certainly he, with his two
attendants, as he turned into a side-path which led to the house! A confused
recollection of having seen somebody who resembled him, immediately occurred,
to puzzle and torment her with endless conjectures. Five minutes sooner, and
she should have seen his face, and been out of suspense—was ever any thing so
unlucky! His steady, bold step, and the whole air of his person, bursting as it
were from a cloud, pleased her, and gave an outline to the imagination to
sketch the individual form she wished to recognize.


Feeling the disappointment more severely than she was willing to believe, she
flew to Rousseau, as her only refuge from the idea of him, who might prove a
friend, could she but find a way to interest him in her fate; still the
personification of Saint Preux, or of an ideal lover far superior, was after
this imperfect model, of which merely a glance had been caught, even to the
minutiae of the coat and hat of the stranger. But if she lent St. Preux, or the
demi-god of her fancy, his form, she richly repaid him by the donation of all
St. Preux’s sentiments and feelings, culled to gratify her own, to which he
seemed to have an undoubted right, when she read on the margin of an
impassioned letter, written in the well-known hand—“Rousseau alone, the true
Prometheus of sentiment, possessed the fire of genius necessary to pourtray the
passion, the truth of which goes so directly to the heart.”


Maria was again true to the hour, yet had finished Rousseau, and begun to
transcribe some selected passages; unable to quit either the author or the
window, before she had a glimpse of the countenance she daily longed to see;
and, when seen, it conveyed no distinct idea to her mind where she had seen it
before. He must have been a transient acquaintance; but to discover an
acquaintance was fortunate, could she contrive to attract his attention, and
excite his sympathy.


Every glance afforded colouring for the picture she was delineating on her
heart; and once, when the window was half open, the sound of his voice reached
her. Conviction flashed on her; she had certainly, in a moment of distress,
heard the same accents. They were manly, and characteristic of a noble mind;
nay, even sweet—or sweet they seemed to her attentive ear.


She started back, trembling, alarmed at the emotion a strange coincidence of
circumstances inspired, and wondering why she thought so much of a stranger,
obliged as she had been by his timely interference; [for she recollected, by
degrees all the circumstances of their former meeting.] She found however that
she could think of nothing else; or, if she thought of her daughter, it was to
wish that she had a father whom her mother could respect and love.

</div></body></text></TEI>