<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Maria; Or, The Wrongs of Woman</title><author>Wollstonecraft, Mary (1759-1797)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Joseph Johnson</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1798</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">

CHAPTER 3

When perusing the first parcel of books, Maria had, with her pencil, written in
one of them a few exclamations, expressive of compassion and sympathy, which
she scarcely remembered, till turning over the leaves of one of the volumes,
lately brought to her, a slip of paper dropped out, which Jemima hastily
snatched up.


“Let me see it,” demanded Maria impatiently, “You surely are not afraid of
trusting me with the effusions of a madman?” “I must consider,” replied Jemima;
and withdrew, with the paper in her hand.


In a life of such seclusion, the passions gain undue force; Maria therefore
felt a great degree of resentment and vexation, which she had not time to
subdue, before Jemima, returning, delivered the paper.



“Whoever you are, who partake of my fate, accept my sincere commiseration—I
would have said protection; but the privilege of man is denied me.


“My own situation forces a dreadful suspicion on my mind—I may not always
languish in vain for freedom—say are you—I cannot ask the question; yet I will
remember you when my remembrance can be of any use. I will enquire, why you are
so mysteriously detained—and I will have an answer.



“HENRY DARNFORD.”


By the most pressing intreaties, Maria prevailed on Jemima to permit her to
write a reply to this note. Another and another succeeded, in which
explanations were not allowed relative to their present situation; but Maria,
with sufficient explicitness, alluded to a former obligation; and they
insensibly entered on an interchange of sentiments on the most important
subjects. To write these letters was the business of the day, and to receive
them the moment of sunshine. By some means, Darnford having discovered Maria’s
window, when she next appeared at it, he made her, behind his keepers, a
profound bow of respect and recognition.


Two or three weeks glided away in this kind of intercourse, during which period
Jemima, to whom Maria had given the necessary information respecting her
family, had evidently gained some intelligence, which increased her desire of
pleasing her charge, though she could not yet determine to liberate her. Maria
took advantage of this favourable charge, without too minutely enquiring into
the cause; and such was her eagerness to hold human converse, and to see her
former protector, still a stranger to her, that she incessantly requested her
guard to gratify her more than curiosity.


Writing to Darnford, she was led from the sad objects before her, and
frequently rendered insensible to the horrid noises around her, which
previously had continually employed her feverish fancy. Thinking it selfish to
dwell on her own sufferings, when in the midst of wretches, who had not only
lost all that endears life, but their very selves, her imagination was occupied
with melancholy earnestness to trace the mazes of misery, through which so many
wretches must have passed to this gloomy receptacle of disjointed souls, to the
grand source of human corruption. Often at midnight was she waked by the dismal
shrieks of demoniac rage, or of excruciating despair, uttered in such wild
tones of indescribable anguish as proved the total absence of reason, and
roused phantoms of horror in her mind, far more terrific than all that dreaming
superstition ever drew. Besides, there was frequently something so
inconceivably picturesque in the varying gestures of unrestrained passion, so
irresistibly comic in their sallies, or so heart-piercingly pathetic in the
little airs they would sing, frequently bursting out after an awful silence, as
to fascinate the attention, and amuse the fancy, while torturing the soul. It
was the uproar of the passions which she was compelled to observe; and to mark
the lucid beam of reason, like a light trembling in a socket, or like the flash
which divides the threatening clouds of angry heaven only to display the
horrors which darkness shrouded.


Jemima would labour to beguile the tedious evenings, by describing the persons
and manners of the unfortunate beings, whose figures or voices awoke
sympathetic sorrow in Maria’s bosom; and the stories she told were the more
interesting, for perpetually leaving room to conjecture something
extraordinary. Still Maria, accustomed to generalize her observations, was led
to conclude from all she heard, that it was a vulgar error to suppose that
people of abilities were the most apt to lose the command of reason. On the
contrary, from most of the instances she could investigate, she thought it
resulted, that the passions only appeared strong and disproportioned, because
the judgment was weak and unexercised; and that they gained strength by the
decay of reason, as the shadows lengthen during the sun’s decline.


Maria impatiently wished to see her fellow-sufferer; but Darnford was still
more earnest to obtain an interview. Accustomed to submit to every impulse of
passion, and never taught, like women, to restrain the most natural, and
acquire, instead of the bewitching frankness of nature, a factitious propriety
of behaviour, every desire became a torrent that bore down all opposition.


His travelling trunk, which contained the books lent to Maria, had been sent to
him, and with a part of its contents he bribed his principal keeper; who, after
receiving the most solemn promise that he would return to his apartment without
attempting to explore any part of the house, conducted him, in the dusk of the
evening, to Maria’s room.


Jemima had apprized her charge of the visit, and she expected with trembling
impatience, inspired by a vague hope that he might again prove her deliverer,
to see a man who had before rescued her from oppression. He entered with an
animation of countenance, formed to captivate an enthusiast; and, hastily
turned his eyes from her to the apartment, which he surveyed with apparent
emotions of compassionate indignation. Sympathy illuminated his eye, and,
taking her hand, he respectfully bowed on it, exclaiming—“This is
extraordinary!—again to meet you, and in such circumstances!” Still, impressive
as was the coincidence of events which brought them once more together, their
full hearts did not overflow.—[4]


 [4]
The copy which had received the author’s last corrections breaks off in this
place, and the pages which follow, to the end of Chap. IV, are printed from a
copy in a less finished state. [Godwin’s note]


[And though, after this first visit, they were permitted frequently to repeat
their interviews, they were for some time employed in] a reserved conversation,
to which all the world might have listened; excepting, when discussing some
literary subject, flashes of sentiment, inforced by each relaxing feature,
seemed to remind them that their minds were already acquainted.


[By degrees, Darnford entered into the particulars of his story.] In a few
words, he informed her that he had been a thoughtless, extravagant young man;
yet, as he described his faults, they appeared to be the generous luxuriancy of
a noble mind. Nothing like meanness tarnished the lustre of his youth, nor had
the worm of selfishness lurked in the unfolding bud, even while he had been the
dupe of others. Yet he tardily acquired the experience necessary to guard him
against future imposition.


“I shall weary you,” continued he, “by my egotism; and did not powerful
emotions draw me to you,”—his eyes glistened as he spoke, and a trembling
seemed to run through his manly frame,—“I would not waste these precious
moments in talking of myself.


“My father and mother were people of fashion; married by their parents. He was
fond of the turf, she of the card-table. I, and two or three other children
since dead, were kept at home till we became intolerable. My father and mother
had a visible dislike to each other, continually displayed; the servants were
of the depraved kind usually found in the houses of people of fortune. My
brothers and parents all dying, I was left to the care of guardians; and sent
to Eton. I never knew the sweets of domestic affection, but I felt the want of
indulgence and frivolous respect at school. I will not disgust you with a
recital of the vices of my youth, which can scarcely be comprehended by female
delicacy. I was taught to love by a creature I am ashamed to mention; and the
other women with whom I afterwards became intimate, were of a class of which
you can have no knowledge. I formed my acquaintance with them at the theaters;
and, when vivacity danced in their eyes, I was not easily disgusted by the
vulgarity which flowed from their lips. Having spent, a few years after I was
of age, [the whole of] a considerable patrimony, excepting a few hundreds, I
had no resource but to purchase a commission in a new-raised regiment, destined
to subjugate America. The regret I felt to renounce a life of pleasure, was
counter-balanced by the curiosity I had to see America, or rather to travel;
[nor had any of those circumstances occurred to my youth, which might have been
calculated] to bind my country to my heart. I shall not trouble you with the
details of a military life. My blood was still kept in motion; till, towards
the close of the contest, I was wounded and taken prisoner.


“Confined to my bed, or chair, by a lingering cure, my only refuge from the
preying activity of my mind, was books, which I read with great avidity,
profiting by the conversation of my host, a man of sound understanding. My
political sentiments now underwent a total change; and, dazzled by the
hospitality of the Americans, I determined to take up my abode with freedom. I,
therefore, with my usual impetuosity, sold my commission, and travelled into
the interior parts of the country, to lay out my money to advantage. Added to
this, I did not much like the puritanical manners of the large towns.
Inequality of condition was there most disgustingly galling. The only pleasure
wealth afforded, was to make an ostentatious display of it; for the cultivation
of the fine arts, or literature, had not introduced into the first circles that
polish of manners which renders the rich so essentially superior to the poor in
Europe. Added to this, an influx of vices had been let in by the Revolution,
and the most rigid principles of religion shaken to the centre, before the
understanding could be gradually emancipated from the prejudices which led
their ancestors undauntedly to seek an inhospitable clime and unbroken soil.
The resolution, that led them, in pursuit of independence, to embark on rivers
like seas, to search for unknown shores, and to sleep under the hovering mists
of endless forests, whose baleful damps agued their limbs, was now turned into
commercial speculations, till the national character exhibited a phenomenon in
the history of the human mind—a head enthusiastically enterprising, with cold
selfishness of heart. And woman, lovely woman!—they charm everywhere—still
there is a degree of prudery, and a want of taste and ease in the manners of
the American women, that renders them, in spite of their roses and lilies, far
inferior to our European charmers. In the country, they have often a bewitching
simplicity of character; but, in the cities, they have all the airs and
ignorance of the ladies who give the tone to the circles of the large trading
towns in England. They are fond of their ornaments, merely because they are
good, and not because they embellish their persons; and are more gratified to
inspire the women with jealousy of these exterior advantages, than the men with
love. All the frivolity which often (excuse me, Madam) renders the society of
modest women so stupid in England, here seemed to throw still more leaden
fetters on their charms. Not being an adept in gallantry, I found that I could
only keep myself awake in their company by making downright love to them.


“But, not to intrude on your patience, I retired to the track of land which I
had purchased in the country, and my time passed pleasantly enough while I cut
down the trees, built my house, and planted my different crops. But winter and
idleness came, and I longed for more elegant society, to hear what was passing
in the world, and to do something better than vegetate with the animals that
made a very considerable part of my household. Consequently, I determined to
travel. Motion was a substitute for variety of objects; and, passing over
immense tracks of country, I exhausted my exuberant spirits, without obtaining
much experience. I every where saw industry the fore-runner and not the
consequence, of luxury; but this country, everything being on an ample scale,
did not afford those picturesque views, which a certain degree of cultivation
is necessary gradually to produce. The eye wandered without an object to fix
upon over immeasureable plains, and lakes that seemed replenished by the ocean,
whilst eternal forests of small clustering trees, obstructed the circulation of
air, and embarrassed the path, without gratifying the eye of taste. No cottage
smiling in the waste, no travellers hailed us, to give life to silent nature;
or, if perchance we saw the print of a footstep in our path, it was a dreadful
warning to turn aside; and the head ached as if assailed by the scalping knife.
The Indians who hovered on the skirts of the European settlements had only
learned of their neighbours to plunder, and they stole their guns from them to
do it with more safety.


“From the woods and back settlements, I returned to the towns, and learned to
eat and drink most valiantly; but without entering into commerce (and I
detested commerce) I found I could not live there; and, growing heartily weary
of the land of liberty and vulgar aristocracy, seated on her bags of dollars, I
resolved once more to visit Europe. I wrote to a distant relation in England,
with whom I had been educated, mentioning the vessel in which I intended to
sail. Arriving in London, my senses were intoxicated. I ran from street to
street, from theater to theater, and the women of the town (again I must beg
pardon for my habitual frankness) appeared to me like angels.


“A week was spent in this thoughtless manner, when, returning very late to the
hotel in which I had lodged ever since my arrival, I was knocked down in a
private street, and hurried, in a state of insensibility, into a coach, which
brought me hither, and I only recovered my senses to be treated like one who
had lost them. My keepers are deaf to my remonstrances and enquiries, yet
assure me that my confinement shall not last long. Still I cannot guess, though
I weary myself with conjectures, why I am confined, or in what part of England
this house is situated. I imagine sometimes that I hear the sea roar, and
wished myself again on the Atlantic, till I had a glimpse of you.”[5]


 [5]
The introduction of Darnford as the deliverer of Maria in a former instance,
appears to have been an after-thought of the author. This has occasioned the
omission of any allusion to that circumstance in the preceding narration.
EDITOR. [Godwin’s note]


A few moments were only allowed to Maria to comment on this narrative, when
Darnford left her to her own thoughts, to the “never ending, still beginning,”
task of weighing his words, recollecting his tones of voice, and feeling them
reverberate on her heart.

</div></body></text></TEI>