<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Maria; Or, The Wrongs of Woman</title><author>Wollstonecraft, Mary (1759-1797)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Joseph Johnson</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1798</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="7">

CHAPTER 7

“Addressing these memoirs to you, my child, uncertain whether I shall ever have
an opportunity of instructing you, many observations will probably flow from my
heart, which only a mother—a mother schooled in misery, could make.


“The tenderness of a father who knew the world, might be great; but could it
equal that of a mother—of a mother, labouring under a portion of the misery,
which the constitution of society seems to have entailed on all her kind? It
is, my child, my dearest daughter, only such a mother, who will dare to break
through all restraint to provide for your happiness—who will voluntarily brave
censure herself, to ward off sorrow from your bosom. From my narrative, my dear
girl, you may gather the instruction, the counsel, which is meant rather to
exercise than influence your mind.—Death may snatch me from you, before you can
weigh my advice, or enter into my reasoning: I would then, with fond anxiety,
lead you very early in life to form your grand principle of action, to save you
from the vain regret of having, through irresolution, let the spring-tide of
existence pass away, unimproved, unenjoyed.—Gain experience—ah! gain it—while
experience is worth having, and acquire sufficient fortitude to pursue your own
happiness; it includes your utility, by a direct path. What is wisdom too
often, but the owl of the goddess, who sits moping in a desolated heart; around
me she shrieks, but I would invite all the gay warblers of spring to nestle in
your blooming bosom.—Had I not wasted years in deliberating, after I ceased to
doubt, how I ought to have acted—I might now be useful and happy.—For my sake,
warned by my example, always appear what you are, and you will not pass through
existence without enjoying its genuine blessings, love and respect.


“Born in one of the most romantic parts of England, an enthusiastic fondness
for the varying charms of nature is the first sentiment I recollect; or rather
it was the first consciousness of pleasure that employed and formed my
imagination.


“My father had been a captain of a man of war; but, disgusted with the service,
on account of the preferment of men whose chief merit was their family
connections or borough interest, he retired into the country; and, not knowing
what to do with himself—married. In his family, to regain his lost consequence,
he determined to keep up the same passive obedience, as in the vessels in which
he had commanded. His orders were not to be disputed; and the whole house was
expected to fly, at the word of command, as if to man the shrouds, or mount
aloft in an elemental strife, big with life or death. He was to be
instantaneously obeyed, especially by my mother, whom he very benevolently
married for love; but took care to remind her of the obligation, when she
dared, in the slightest instance, to question his absolute authority. My eldest
brother, it is true, as he grew up, was treated with more respect by my father;
and became in due form the deputy-tyrant of the house. The representative of my
father, a being privileged by nature—a boy, and the darling of my mother, he
did not fail to act like an heir apparent. Such indeed was my mother’s
extravagant partiality, that, in comparison with her affection for him, she
might be said not to love the rest of her children. Yet none of the children
seemed to have so little affection for her. Extreme indulgence had rendered him
so selfish, that he only thought of himself; and from tormenting insects and
animals, he became the despot of his brothers, and still more of his sisters.


“It is perhaps difficult to give you an idea of the petty cares which obscured
the morning of my life; continual restraint in the most trivial matters;
unconditional submission to orders, which, as a mere child, I soon discovered
to be unreasonable, because inconsistent and contradictory. Thus are we
destined to experience a mixture of bitterness, with the recollection of our
most innocent enjoyments.


“The circumstances which, during my childhood, occurred to fashion my mind,
were various; yet, as it would probably afford me more pleasure to revive the
fading remembrance of newborn delight, than you, my child, could feel in the
perusal, I will not entice you to stray with me into the verdant meadow, to
search for the flowers that youthful hopes scatter in every path; though, as I
write, I almost scent the fresh green of spring—of that spring which never
returns!


“I had two sisters, and one brother, younger than myself, my brother Robert was
two years older, and might truly be termed the idol of his parents, and the
torment of the rest of the family. Such indeed is the force of prejudice, that
what was called spirit and wit in him, was cruelly repressed as forwardness in
me.


“My mother had an indolence of character, which prevented her from paying much
attention to our education. But the healthy breeze of a neighbouring heath, on
which we bounded at pleasure, volatilized the humours that improper food might
have generated. And to enjoy open air and freedom, was paradise, after the
unnatural restraint of our fireside, where we were often obliged to sit three
or four hours together, without daring to utter a word, when my father was out
of humour, from want of employment, or of a variety of boisterous amusement. I
had however one advantage, an instructor, the brother of my father, who,
intended for the church, had of course received a liberal education. But,
becoming attached to a young lady of great beauty and large fortune, and
acquiring in the world some opinions not consonant with the profession for
which he was designed, he accepted, with the most sanguine expectations of
success, the offer of a nobleman to accompany him to India, as his confidential
secretary.


“A correspondence was regularly kept up with the object of his affection; and
the intricacies of business, peculiarly wearisome to a man of a romantic turn
of mind, contributed, with a forced absence, to increase his attachment. Every
other passion was lost in this master-one, and only served to swell the
torrent. Her relations, such were his waking dreams, who had despised him,
would court in their turn his alliance, and all the blandishments of taste
would grace the triumph of love.—While he basked in the warm sunshine of love,
friendship also promised to shed its dewy freshness; for a friend, whom he
loved next to his mistress, was the confident, who forwarded the letters from
one to the other, to elude the observation of prying relations. A friend false
in similar circumstances, is, my dearest girl, an old tale; yet, let not this
example, or the frigid caution of coldblooded moralists, make you endeavour to
stifle hopes, which are the buds that naturally unfold themselves during the
spring of life! Whilst your own heart is sincere, always expect to meet one
glowing with the same sentiments; for to fly from pleasure, is not to avoid
pain!


“My uncle realized, by good luck, rather than management, a handsome fortune;
and returning on the wings of love, lost in the most enchanting reveries, to
England, to share it with his mistress and his friend, he found them—united.


“There were some circumstances, not necessary for me to recite, which
aggravated the guilt of the friend beyond measure, and the deception, that had
been carried on to the last moment, was so base, it produced the most violent
effect on my uncle’s health and spirits. His native country, the world! lately
a garden of blooming sweets, blasted by treachery, seemed changed into a
parched desert, the abode of hissing serpents. Disappointment rankled in his
heart; and, brooding over his wrongs, he was attacked by a raging fever,
followed by a derangement of mind, which only gave place to habitual
melancholy, as he recovered more strength of body.


“Declaring an intention never to marry, his relations were ever clustering
about him, paying the grossest adulation to a man, who, disgusted with mankind,
received them with scorn, or bitter sarcasms. Something in my countenance
pleased him, when I began to prattle. Since his return, he appeared dead to
affection; but I soon, by showing him innocent fondness, became a favourite;
and endeavouring to enlarge and strengthen my mind, I grew dear to him in
proportion as I imbibed his sentiments. He had a forcible manner of speaking,
rendered more so by a certain impressive wildness of look and gesture,
calculated to engage the attention of a young and ardent mind. It is not then
surprising that I quickly adopted his opinions in preference, and reverenced
him as one of a superior order of beings. He inculcated, with great warmth,
self-respect, and a lofty consciousness of acting right, independent of the
censure or applause of the world; nay, he almost taught me to brave, and even
despise its censure, when convinced of the rectitude of my own intentions.


“Endeavouring to prove to me that nothing which deserved the name of love or
friendship, existed in the world, he drew such animated pictures of his own
feelings, rendered permanent by disappointment, as imprinted the sentiments
strongly on my heart, and animated my imagination. These remarks are necessary
to elucidate some peculiarities in my character, which by the world are
indefinitely termed romantic.


“My uncle’s increasing affection led him to visit me often. Still, unable to
rest in any place, he did not remain long in the country to soften domestic
tyranny; but he brought me books, for which I had a passion, and they conspired
with his conversation, to make me form an ideal picture of life. I shall pass
over the tyranny of my father, much as I suffered from it; but it is necessary
to notice, that it undermined my mother’s health; and that her temper,
continually irritated by domestic bickering, became intolerably peevish.


“My eldest brother was articled to a neighbouring attorney, the shrewdest, and,
I may add, the most unprincipled man in that part of the country. As my brother
generally came home every Saturday, to astonish my mother by exhibiting his
attainments, he gradually assumed a right of directing the whole family, not
excepting my father. He seemed to take a peculiar pleasure in tormenting and
humbling me; and if I ever ventured to complain of this treatment to either my
father or mother, I was rudely rebuffed for presuming to judge of the conduct
of my eldest brother.


“About this period a merchant’s family came to settle in our neighbourhood. A
mansion-house in the village, lately purchased, had been preparing the whole
spring, and the sight of the costly furniture, sent from London, had excited my
mother’s envy, and roused my father’s pride. My sensations were very different,
and all of a pleasurable kind. I longed to see new characters, to break the
tedious monotony of my life; and to find a friend, such as fancy had
pourtrayed. I cannot then describe the emotion I felt, the Sunday they made
their appearance at church. My eyes were rivetted on the pillar round which I
expected first to catch a glimpse of them, and darted forth to meet a servant
who hastily preceded a group of ladies, whose white robes and waving plumes,
seemed to stream along the gloomy aisle, diffusing the light, by which I
contemplated their figures.


“We visited them in form; and I quickly selected the eldest daughter for my
friend. The second son, George, paid me particular attention, and finding his
attainments and manners superior to those of the young men of the village, I
began to imagine him superior to the rest of mankind. Had my home been more
comfortable, or my previous acquaintance more numerous, I should not probably
have been so eager to open my heart to new affections.


“Mr. Venables, the merchant, had acquired a large fortune by unremitting
attention to business; but his health declining rapidly, he was obliged to
retire, before his son, George, had acquired sufficient experience, to enable
him to conduct their affairs on the same prudential plan, his father had
invariably pursued. Indeed, he had laboured to throw off his authority, having
despised his narrow plans and cautious speculation. The eldest son could not be
prevailed on to enter the firm; and, to oblige his wife, and have peace in the
house, Mr. Venables had purchased a commission for him in the guards.


“I am now alluding to circumstances which came to my knowledge long after; but
it is necessary, my dearest child, that you should know the character of your
father, to prevent your despising your mother; the only parent inclined to
discharge a parent’s duty. In London, George had acquired habits of
libertinism, which he carefully concealed from his father and his commercial
connections. The mask he wore, was so complete a covering of his real visage,
that the praise his father lavished on his conduct, and, poor mistaken man! on
his principles, contrasted with his brother’s, rendered the notice he took of
me peculiarly flattering. Without any fixed design, as I am now convinced, he
continued to single me out at the dance, press my hand at parting, and utter
expressions of unmeaning passion, to which I gave a meaning naturally suggested
by the romantic turn of my thoughts. His stay in the country was short; his
manners did not entirely please me; but, when he left us, the colouring of my
picture became more vivid—Whither did not my imagination lead me? In short, I
fancied myself in love—in love with the disinterestedness, fortitude,
generosity, dignity, and humanity, with which I had invested the hero I dubbed.
A circumstance which soon after occurred, rendered all these virtues palpable.
[The incident is perhaps worth relating on other accounts, and therefore I
shall describe it distinctly.]


“I had a great affection for my nurse, old Mary, for whom I used often to work,
to spare her eyes. Mary had a younger sister, married to a sailor, while she
was suckling me; for my mother only suckled my eldest brother, which might be
the cause of her extraordinary partiality. Peggy, Mary’s sister, lived with
her, till her husband, becoming a mate in a West-Indian trader, got a little
before-hand in the world. He wrote to his wife from the first port in the
Channel, after his most successful voyage, to request her to come to London to
meet him; he even wished her to determine on living there for the future, to
save him the trouble of coming to her the moment he came on shore; and to turn
a penny by keeping a green-stall. It was too much to set out on a journey the
moment he had finished a voyage, and fifty miles by land, was worse than a
thousand leagues by sea.


“She packed up her alls, and came to London—but did not meet honest Daniel. A
common misfortune prevented her, and the poor are bound to suffer for the good
of their country—he was pressed in the river—and never came on shore.


“Peggy was miserable in London, not knowing, as she said, ‘the face of any
living soul.’ Besides, her imagination had been employed, anticipating a month
or six weeks’ happiness with her husband. Daniel was to have gone with her to
Sadler’s Wells, and Westminster Abbey, and to many sights, which he knew she
never heard of in the country. Peggy too was thrifty, and how could she manage
to put his plan in execution alone? He had acquaintance; but she did not know
the very name of their places of abode. His letters were made up of—How do you
does, and God bless yous,—information was reserved for the hour of meeting.


“She too had her portion of information, near at heart. Molly and Jacky were
grown such little darlings, she was almost angry that daddy did not see their
tricks. She had not half the pleasure she should have had from their prattle,
could she have recounted to him each night the pretty speeches of the day. Some
stories, however, were stored up—and Jacky could say papa with such a sweet
voice, it must delight his heart. Yet when she came, and found no Daniel to
greet her, when Jacky called papa, she wept, bidding ‘God bless his innocent
soul, that did not know what sorrow was.’—But more sorrow was in store for
Peggy, innocent as she was.—Daniel was killed in the first engagement, and then
the papa was agony, sounding to the heart.


“She had lived sparingly on his wages, while there was any hope of his return;
but, that gone, she returned with a breaking heart to the country, to a little
market town, nearly three miles from our village. She did not like to go to
service, to be snubbed about, after being her own mistress. To put her children
out to nurse was impossible: how far would her wages go? and to send them to
her husband’s parish, a distant one, was to lose her husband twice over.


“I had heard all from Mary, and made my uncle furnish a little cottage for her,
to enable her to sell—so sacred was poor Daniel’s advice, now he was dead and
gone a little fruit, toys and cakes. The minding of the shop did not require
her whole time, nor even the keeping her children clean, and she loved to see
them clean; so she took in washing, and altogether made a shift to earn bread
for her children, still weeping for Daniel, when Jacky’s arch looks made her
think of his father.—It was pleasant to work for her children.—‘Yes; from
morning till night, could she have had a kiss from their father, God rest his
soul! Yes; had it pleased Providence to have let him come back without a leg or
an arm, it would have been the same thing to her—for she did not love him
because he maintained them—no; she had hands of her own.’


“The country people were honest, and Peggy left her linen out to dry very late.
A recruiting party, as she supposed, passing through, made free with a large
wash; for it was all swept away, including her own and her children’s little
stock.


“This was a dreadful blow; two dozen of shirts, stocks and handkerchiefs. She
gave the money which she had laid by for half a year’s rent, and promised to
pay two shillings a week till all was cleared; so she did not lose her
employment. This two shillings a week, and the buying a few necessaries for the
children, drove her so hard, that she had not a penny to pay her rent with,
when a twelvemonth’s became due.


“She was now with Mary, and had just told her tale, which Mary instantly
repeated—it was intended for my ear. Many houses in this town, producing a
borough-interest, were included in the estate purchased by Mr. Venables, and
the attorney with whom my brother lived, was appointed his agent, to collect
and raise the rents.


“He demanded Peggy’s, and, in spite of her intreaties, her poor goods had been
seized and sold. So that she had not, and what was worse her children, ‘for she
had known sorrow enough,’ a bed to lie on. She knew that I was
good-natured—right charitable, yet not liking to ask for more than needs must,
she scorned to petition while people could any how be made to wait. But now,
should she be turned out of doors, she must expect nothing less than to lose
all her customers, and then she must beg or starve—and what would become of her
children?—‘had Daniel not been pressed—but God knows best—all this could not
have happened.’


“I had two mattresses on my bed; what did I want with two, when such a worthy
creature must lie on the ground? My mother would be angry, but I could conceal
it till my uncle came down; and then I would tell him all the whole truth, and
if he absolved me, heaven would.


“I begged the house-maid to come up stairs with me (servants always feel for
the distresses of poverty, and so would the rich if they knew what it was). She
assisted me to tie up the mattrass; I discovering, at the same time, that one
blanket would serve me till winter, could I persuade my sister, who slept with
me, to keep my secret. She entering in the midst of the package, I gave her
some new feathers, to silence her. We got the mattrass down the back stairs,
unperceived, and I helped to carry it, taking with me all the money I had, and
what I could borrow from my sister.


“When I got to the cottage, Peggy declared that she would not take what I had
brought secretly; but, when, with all the eager eloquence inspired by a decided
purpose, I grasped her hand with weeping eyes, assuring her that my uncle would
screen me from blame, when he was once more in the country, describing, at the
same time, what she would suffer in parting with her children, after keeping
them so long from being thrown on the parish, she reluctantly consented.


“My project of usefulness ended not here; I determined to speak to the
attorney; he frequently paid me compliments. His character did not intimidate
me; but, imagining that Peggy must be mistaken, and that no man could turn a
deaf ear to such a tale of complicated distress, I determined to walk to the
town with Mary the next morning, and request him to wait for the rent, and keep
my secret, till my uncle’s return.


“My repose was sweet; and, waking with the first dawn of day, I bounded to
Mary’s cottage. What charms do not a light heart spread over nature! Every bird
that twittered in a bush, every flower that enlivened the hedge, seemed placed
there to awaken me to rapture—yes; to rapture. The present moment was full
fraught with happiness; and on futurity I bestowed not a thought, excepting to
anticipate my success with the attorney.


“This man of the world, with rosy face and simpering features, received me
politely, nay kindly; listened with complacency to my remonstrances, though he
scarcely heeded Mary’s tears. I did not then suspect, that my eloquence was in
my complexion, the blush of seventeen, or that, in a world where humanity to
women is the characteristic of advancing civilization, the beauty of a young
girl was so much more interesting than the distress of an old one. Pressing my
hand, he promised to let Peggy remain in the house as long as I wished.—I more
than returned the pressure—I was so grateful and so happy. Emboldened by my
innocent warmth, he then kissed me—and I did not draw back—I took it for a kiss
of charity.


“Gay as a lark, I went to dine at Mr. Venables’. I had previously obtained five
shillings from my father, towards re-clothing the poor children of my care, and
prevailed on my mother to take one of the girls into the house, whom I
determined to teach to work and read.


“After dinner, when the younger part of the circle retired to the music room, I
recounted with energy my tale; that is, I mentioned Peggy’s distress, without
hinting at the steps I had taken to relieve her. Miss Venables gave me
half-a-crown; the heir five shillings; but George sat unmoved. I was cruelly
distressed by the disappointment—I scarcely could remain on my chair; and,
could I have got out of the room unperceived, I should have flown home, as if
to run away from myself. After several vain attempts to rise, I leaned my head
against the marble chimney-piece, and gazing on the evergreens that filled the
fire-place, moralized on the vanity of human expectations; regardless of the
company. I was roused by a gentle tap on my shoulder from behind Charlotte’s
chair. I turned my head, and George slid a guinea into my hand, putting his
finger to his mouth, to enjoin me silence.


“What a revolution took place, not only in my train of thoughts, but feelings!
I trembled with emotion—now, indeed, I was in love. Such delicacy too, to
enhance his benevolence! I felt in my pocket every five minutes, only to feel
the guinea; and its magic touch invested my hero with more than mortal beauty.
My fancy had found a basis to erect its model of perfection on; and quickly
went to work, with all the happy credulity of youth, to consider that heart as
devoted to virtue, which had only obeyed a virtuous impulse. The bitter
experience was yet to come, that has taught me how very distinct are the
principles of virtue, from the casual feelings from which they germinate.”

</div></body></text></TEI>