<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Maria; Or, The Wrongs of Woman</title><author>Wollstonecraft, Mary (1759-1797)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Joseph Johnson</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1798</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">

CHAPTER 11

“A gentleman of large fortune and of polished manners, had lately visited very
frequently at our house, and treated me, if possible, with more respect than
Mr. Venables paid him; my pregnancy was not yet visible, his society was a
great relief to me, as I had for some time past, to avoid expence, confined
myself very much at home. I ever disdained unnecessary, perhaps even prudent
concealments; and my husband, with great ease, discovered the amount of my
uncle’s parting present. A copy of a writ was the stale pretext to extort it
from me; and I had soon reason to believe that it was fabricated for the
purpose. I acknowledge my folly in thus suffering myself to be continually
imposed on. I had adhered to my resolution not to apply to my uncle, on the
part of my husband, any more; yet, when I had received a sum sufficient to
supply my own wants, and to enable me to pursue a plan I had in view, to settle
my younger brother in a respectable employment, I allowed myself to be duped by
Mr. Venables’ shallow pretences, and hypocritical professions.


“Thus did he pillage me and my family, thus frustrate all my plans of
usefulness. Yet this was the man I was bound to respect and esteem: as if
respect and esteem depended on an arbitrary will of our own! But a wife being
as much a man’s property as his horse, or his ass, she has nothing she can call
her own. He may use any means to get at what the law considers as his, the
moment his wife is in possession of it, even to the forcing of a lock, as Mr.
Venables did, to search for notes in my writing-desk—and all this is done with
a show of equity, because, forsooth, he is responsible for her maintenance.


“The tender mother cannot lawfully snatch from the gripe of the gambling
spendthrift, or beastly drunkard, unmindful of his offspring, the fortune which
falls to her by chance; or (so flagrant is the injustice) what she earns by her
own exertions. No; he can rob her with impunity, even to waste publicly on a
courtezan; and the laws of her country—if women have a country—afford her no
protection or redress from the oppressor, unless she have the plea of bodily
fear; yet how many ways are there of goading the soul almost to madness,
equally unmanly, though not so mean? When such laws were framed, should not
impartial lawgivers have first decreed, in the style of a great assembly, who
recognized the existence of an être suprême, to fix the national belief,
that the husband should always be wiser and more virtuous than his wife, in
order to entitle him, with a show of justice, to keep this idiot, or perpetual
minor, for ever in bondage. But I must have done—on this subject, my
indignation continually runs away with me.


“The company of the gentleman I have already mentioned, who had a general
acquaintance with literature and subjects of taste, was grateful to me; my
countenance brightened up as he approached, and I unaffectedly expressed the
pleasure I felt. The amusement his conversation afforded me, made it easy to
comply with my husband’s request, to endeavour to render our house agreeable to
him.


“His attentions became more pointed; but, as I was not of the number of women,
whose virtue, as it is termed, immediately takes alarm, I endeavoured, rather
by raillery than serious expostulation, to give a different turn to his
conversation. He assumed a new mode of attack, and I was, for a while, the dupe
of his pretended friendship.


“I had, merely in the style of badinage, boasted of my conquest, and
repeated his lover-like compliments to my husband. But he begged me, for God’s
sake, not to affront his friend, or I should destroy all his projects, and be
his ruin. Had I had more affection for my husband, I should have expressed my
contempt of this time-serving politeness: now I imagined that I only felt pity;
yet it would have puzzled a casuist to point out in what the exact difference
consisted.


“This friend began now, in confidence, to discover to me the real state of my
husband’s affairs. ‘Necessity,’ said Mr. S——; why should I reveal his name? for
he affected to palliate the conduct he could not excuse, ‘had led him to take
such steps, by accommodation bills, buying goods on credit, to sell them for
ready money, and similar transactions, that his character in the commercial
world was gone. He was considered,’ he added, lowering his voice, ‘on ‘Change
as a swindler.’


“I felt at that moment the first maternal pang. Aware of the evils my sex have
to struggle with, I still wished, for my own consolation, to be the mother of a
daughter; and I could not bear to think, that the sins of her father’s
entailed disgrace, should be added to the ills to which woman is heir.


“So completely was I deceived by these shows of friendship (nay, I believe,
according to his interpretation, Mr. S—— really was my friend) that I began to
consult him respecting the best mode of retrieving my husband’s character: it
is the good name of a woman only that sets to rise no more. I knew not that he
had been drawn into a whirlpool, out of which he had not the energy to attempt
to escape. He seemed indeed destitute of the power of employing his faculties
in any regular pursuit. His principles of action were so loose, and his mind so
uncultivated, that every thing like order appeared to him in the shape of
restraint; and, like men in the savage state, he required the strong stimulus
of hope or fear, produced by wild speculations, in which the interests of
others went for nothing, to keep his spirits awake. He one time professed
patriotism, but he knew not what it was to feel honest indignation; and
pretended to be an advocate for liberty, when, with as little affection for the
human race as for individuals, he thought of nothing but his own gratification.
He was just such a citizen, as a father. The sums he adroitly obtained by a
violation of the laws of his country, as well as those of humanity, he would
allow a mistress to squander; though she was, with the same sang froid,
consigned, as were his children, to poverty, when another proved more
attractive.


“On various pretences, his friend continued to visit me; and, observing my want
of money, he tried to induce me to accept of pecuniary aid; but this offer I
absolutely rejected, though it was made with such delicacy, I could not be
displeased.


“One day he came, as I thought accidentally, to dinner. My husband was very
much engaged in business, and quitted the room soon after the cloth was
removed. We conversed as usual, till confidential advice led again to love. I
was extremely mortified. I had a sincere regard for him, and hoped that he had
an equal friendship for me. I therefore began mildly to expostulate with him.
This gentleness he mistook for coy encouragement; and he would not be diverted
from the subject. Perceiving his mistake, I seriously asked him how, using such
language to me, he could profess to be my husband’s friend? A significant sneer
excited my curiosity, and he, supposing this to be my only scruple, took a
letter deliberately out of his pocket, saying, ‘Your husband’s honour is not
inflexible. How could you, with your discernment, think it so? Why, he left the
room this very day on purpose to give me an opportunity to explain myself;
he thought me too timid—too tardy.


“I snatched the letter with indescribable emotion. The purport of it was to
invite him to dinner, and to ridicule his chivalrous respect for me. He assured
him, ‘that every woman had her price, and, with gross indecency, hinted, that
he should be glad to have the duty of a husband taken off his hands. These he
termed liberal sentiments. He advised him not to shock my romantic
notions, but to attack my credulous generosity, and weak pity; and concluded
with requesting him to lend him five hundred pounds for a month or six weeks.’
I read this letter twice over; and the firm purpose it inspired, calmed the
rising tumult of my soul. I rose deliberately, requested Mr. S—— to wait a
moment, and instantly going into the counting-house, desired Mr. Venables to
return with me to the dining-parlour.


“He laid down his pen, and entered with me, without observing any change in my
countenance. I shut the door, and, giving him the letter, simply asked,
‘whether he wrote it, or was it a forgery?’


“Nothing could equal his confusion. His friend’s eye met his, and he muttered
something about a joke—But I interrupted him—‘It is sufficient—We part for
ever.’


“I continued, with solemnity, ‘I have borne with your tyranny and infidelities.
I disdain to utter what I have borne with. I thought you unprincipled, but not
so decidedly vicious. I formed a tie, in the sight of heaven—I have held it
sacred; even when men, more conformable to my taste, have made me feel—I
despise all subterfuge!—that I was not dead to love. Neglected by you, I have
resolutely stifled the enticing emotions, and respected the plighted faith you
outraged. And you dare now to insult me, by selling me to
prostitution!—Yes—equally lost to delicacy and principle—you dared
sacrilegiously to barter the honour of the mother of your child.’


“Then, turning to Mr. S——, I added, ‘I call on you, Sir, to witness,’ and I
lifted my hands and eyes to heaven, ‘that, as solemnly as I took his name, I
now abjure it,’ I pulled off my ring, and put it on the table; ‘and that I mean
immediately to quit his house, never to enter it more. I will provide for
myself and child. I leave him as free as I am determined to be myself—he shall
be answerable for no debts of mine.’


“Astonishment closed their lips, till Mr. Venables, gently pushing his friend,
with a forced smile, out of the room, nature for a moment prevailed, and,
appearing like himself, he turned round, burning with rage, to me: but there
was no terror in the frown, excepting when contrasted with the malignant smile
which preceded it. He bade me ‘leave the house at my peril; told me he despised
my threats; I had no resource; I could not swear the peace against him!—I was
not afraid of my life!—he had never struck me!’


“He threw the letter in the fire, which I had incautiously left in his hands;
and, quitting the room, locked the door on me.


“When left alone, I was a moment or two before I could recollect myself—One
scene had succeeded another with such rapidity, I almost doubted whether I was
reflecting on a real event. ‘Was it possible? Was I, indeed, free?’—Yes; free I
termed myself, when I decidedly perceived the conduct I ought to adopt. How had
I panted for liberty—liberty, that I would have purchased at any price, but
that of my own esteem! I rose, and shook myself; opened the window, and
methought the air never smelled so sweet. The face of heaven grew fairer as I
viewed it, and the clouds seemed to flit away obedient to my wishes, to give my
soul room to expand. I was all soul, and (wild as it may appear) felt as if I
could have dissolved in the soft balmy gale that kissed my cheek, or have
glided below the horizon on the glowing, descending beams. A seraphic
satisfaction animated, without agitating my spirits; and my imagination
collected, in visions sublimely terrible, or soothingly beautiful, an immense
variety of the endless images, which nature affords, and fancy combines, of the
grand and fair. The lustre of these bright picturesque sketches faded with the
setting sun; but I was still alive to the calm delight they had diffused
through my heart.


“There may be advocates for matrimonial obedience, who, making a distinction
between the duty of a wife and of a human being, may blame my conduct.—To them
I write not—my feelings are not for them to analyze; and may you, my child,
never be able to ascertain, by heart-rending experience, what your mother felt
before the present emancipation of her mind!


“I began to write a letter to my father, after closing one to my uncle; not to
ask advice, but to signify my determination; when I was interrupted by the
entrance of Mr. Venables. His manner was changed. His views on my uncle’s
fortune made him averse to my quitting his house, or he would, I am convinced,
have been glad to have shaken off even the slight restraint my presence imposed
on him; the restraint of showing me some respect. So far from having an
affection for me, he really hated me, because he was convinced that I must
despise him.


“He told me, that ‘As I now had had time to cool and reflect, he did not doubt
but that my prudence, and nice sense of propriety, would lead me to overlook
what was passed.’


“‘Reflection,’ I replied, ‘had only confirmed my purpose, and no power on earth
could divert me from it.’


“Endeavouring to assume a soothing voice and look, when he would willingly have
tortured me, to force me to feel his power, his countenance had an infernal
expression, when he desired me, ‘Not to expose myself to the servants, by
obliging him to confine me in my apartment; if then I would give my promise not
to quit the house precipitately, I should be free—and—.’ I declared,
interrupting him, ‘that I would promise nothing. I had no measures to keep with
him—I was resolved, and would not condescend to subterfuge.’


“He muttered, ‘that I should soon repent of these preposterous airs;’ and,
ordering tea to be carried into my little study, which had a communication with
my bed-chamber, he once more locked the door upon me, and left me to my own
meditations. I had passively followed him up stairs, not wishing to fatigue
myself with unavailing exertion.


“Nothing calms the mind like a fixed purpose. I felt as if I had heaved a
thousand weight from my heart; the atmosphere seemed lightened; and, if I
execrated the institutions of society, which thus enable men to tyrannize over
women, it was almost a disinterested sentiment. I disregarded present
inconveniences, when my mind had done struggling with itself,—when reason and
inclination had shaken hands and were at peace. I had no longer the cruel task
before me, in endless perspective, aye, during the tedious for ever of life, of
labouring to overcome my repugnance—of labouring to extinguish the hopes, the
maybes of a lively imagination. Death I had hailed as my only chance for
deliverance; but, while existence had still so many charms, and life promised
happiness, I shrunk from the icy arms of an unknown tyrant, though far more
inviting than those of the man, to whom I supposed myself bound without any
other alternative; and was content to linger a little longer, waiting for I
knew not what, rather than leave ‘the warm precincts of the cheerful day,’ and
all the unenjoyed affection of my nature.


“My present situation gave a new turn to my reflection; and I wondered (now the
film seemed to be withdrawn, that obscured the piercing sight of reason) how I
could, previously to the deciding outrage, have considered myself as
everlastingly united to vice and folly! ‘Had an evil genius cast a spell at my
birth; or a demon stalked out of chaos, to perplex my understanding, and
enchain my will, with delusive prejudices?’


“I pursued this train of thinking; it led me out of myself, to expatiate on the
misery peculiar to my sex. ‘Are not,’ I thought, ‘the despots for ever
stigmatized, who, in the wantonness of power, commanded even the most atrocious
criminals to be chained to dead bodies? though surely those laws are much more
inhuman, which forge adamantine fetters to bind minds together, that never can
mingle in social communion! What indeed can equal the wretchedness of that
state, in which there is no alternative, but to extinguish the affections, or
encounter infamy?’”

</div></body></text></TEI>