<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Maria; Or, The Wrongs of Woman</title><author>Wollstonecraft, Mary (1759-1797)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Joseph Johnson</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1798</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="5">

CHAPTER 5

“My father,” said Jemima, “seduced my mother, a pretty girl, with whom he lived
fellow-servant; and she no sooner perceived the natural, the dreaded
consequence, than the terrible conviction flashed on her—that she was ruined.
Honesty, and a regard for her reputation, had been the only principles
inculcated by her mother; and they had been so forcibly impressed, that she
feared shame, more than the poverty to which it would lead. Her incessant
importunities to prevail upon my father to screen her from reproach by marrying
her, as he had promised in the fervour of seduction, estranged him from her so
completely, that her very person became distasteful to him; and he began to
hate, as well as despise me, before I was born.


“My mother, grieved to the soul by his neglect, and unkind treatment, actually
resolved to famish herself; and injured her health by the attempt; though she
had not sufficient resolution to adhere to her project, or renounce it
entirely. Death came not at her call; yet sorrow, and the methods she adopted
to conceal her condition, still doing the work of a house-maid, had such an
effect on her constitution, that she died in the wretched garret, where her
virtuous mistress had forced her to take refuge in the very pangs of labour,
though my father, after a slight reproof, was allowed to remain in his
place—allowed by the mother of six children, who, scarcely permitting a
footstep to be heard, during her month’s indulgence, felt no sympathy for the
poor wretch, denied every comfort required by her situation.


“The day my mother, died, the ninth after my birth, I was consigned to the care
of the cheapest nurse my father could find; who suckled her own child at the
same time, and lodged as many more as she could get, in two cellar-like
apartments.


“Poverty, and the habit of seeing children die off her hands, had so hardened
her heart, that the office of a mother did not awaken the tenderness of a
woman; nor were the feminine caresses which seem a part of the rearing of a
child, ever bestowed on me. The chicken has a wing to shelter under; but I had
no bosom to nestle in, no kindred warmth to foster me. Left in dirt, to cry
with cold and hunger till I was weary, and sleep without ever being prepared by
exercise, or lulled by kindness to rest; could I be expected to become any
thing but a weak and rickety babe? Still, in spite of neglect, I continued to
exist, to learn to curse existence, [her countenance grew ferocious as she
spoke,] and the treatment that rendered me miserable, seemed to sharpen my
wits. Confined then in a damp hovel, to rock the cradle of the succeeding
tribe, I looked like a little old woman, or a hag shrivelling into nothing. The
furrows of reflection and care contracted the youthful cheek, and gave a sort
of supernatural wildness to the ever watchful eye. During this period, my
father had married another fellow-servant, who loved him less, and knew better
how to manage his passion, than my mother. She likewise proving with child,
they agreed to keep a shop: my step-mother, if, being an illegitimate
offspring, I may venture thus to characterize her, having obtained a sum of a
rich relation, for that purpose.


“Soon after her lying-in, she prevailed on my father to take me home, to save
the expense of maintaining me, and of hiring a girl to assist her in the care
of the child. I was young, it was true, but appeared a knowing little thing,
and might be made handy. Accordingly I was brought to her house; but not to a
home—for a home I never knew. Of this child, a daughter, she was extravagantly
fond; and it was a part of my employment, to assist to spoil her, by humouring
all her whims, and bearing all her caprices. Feeling her own consequence,
before she could speak, she had learned the art of tormenting me, and if I ever
dared to resist, I received blows, laid on with no compunctious hand, or was
sent to bed dinnerless, as well as supperless. I said that it was a part of my
daily labour to attend this child, with the servility of a slave; still it was
but a part. I was sent out in all seasons, and from place to place, to carry
burdens far above my strength, without being allowed to draw near the fire, or
ever being cheered by encouragement or kindness. No wonder then, treated like a
creature of another species, that I began to envy, and at length to hate, the
darling of the house. Yet, I perfectly remember, that it was the caresses, and
kind expressions of my step-mother, which first excited my jealous discontent.
Once, I cannot forget it, when she was calling in vain her wayward child to
kiss her, I ran to her, saying, ‘I will kiss you, ma’am!’ and how did my heart,
which was in my mouth, sink, what was my debasement of soul, when pushed away
with—‘I do not want you, pert thing!’ Another day, when a new gown had excited
the highest good humour, and she uttered the appropriate dear, addressed
unexpectedly to me, I thought I could never do enough to please her; I was all
alacrity, and rose proportionably in my own estimation.


“As her daughter grew up, she was pampered with cakes and fruit, while I was,
literally speaking, fed with the refuse of the table, with her leavings. A
liquorish tooth is, I believe, common to children, and I used to steal any
thing sweet, that I could catch up with a chance of concealment. When detected,
she was not content to chastize me herself at the moment, but, on my father’s
return in the evening (he was a shopman), the principal discourse was to
recount my faults, and attribute them to the wicked disposition which I had
brought into the world with me, inherited from my mother. He did not fail to
leave the marks of his resentment on my body, and then solaced himself by
playing with my sister.—I could have murdered her at those moments. To save
myself from these unmerciful corrections, I resorted to falshood, and the
untruths which I sturdily maintained, were brought in judgment against me, to
support my tyrant’s inhuman charge of my natural propensity to vice. Seeing me
treated with contempt, and always being fed and dressed better, my sister
conceived a contemptuous opinion of me, that proved an obstacle to all
affection; and my father, hearing continually of my faults, began to consider
me as a curse entailed on him for his sins: he was therefore easily prevailed
on to bind me apprentice to one of my step-mother’s friends, who kept a
slop-shop in Wapping. I was represented (as it was said) in my true colours;
but she, ‘warranted,’ snapping her fingers, ‘that she should break my spirit or
heart.’


“My mother replied, with a whine, ‘that if any body could make me better, it
was such a clever woman as herself; though, for her own part, she had tried in
vain; but good-nature was her fault.’


“I shudder with horror, when I recollect the treatment I had now to endure. Not
only under the lash of my task-mistress, but the drudge of the maid,
apprentices and children, I never had a taste of human kindness to soften the
rigour of perpetual labour. I had been introduced as an object of abhorrence
into the family; as a creature of whom my step-mother, though she had been kind
enough to let me live in the house with her own child, could make nothing. I
was described as a wretch, whose nose must be kept to the grinding stone—and it
was held there with an iron grasp. It seemed indeed the privilege of their
superior nature to kick me about, like the dog or cat. If I were attentive, I
was called fawning, if refractory, an obstinate mule, and like a mule I
received their censure on my loaded back. Often has my mistress, for some
instance of forgetfulness, thrown me from one side of the kitchen to the other,
knocked my head against the wall, spit in my face, with various refinements on
barbarity that I forbear to enumerate, though they were all acted over again by
the servant, with additional insults, to which the appellation of bastard, was
commonly added, with taunts or sneers. But I will not attempt to give you an
adequate idea of my situation, lest you, who probably have never been drenched
with the dregs of human misery, should think I exaggerate.


“I stole now, from absolute necessity,—bread; yet whatever else was taken,
which I had it not in my power to take, was ascribed to me. I was the filching
cat, the ravenous dog, the dumb brute, who must bear all; for if I endeavoured
to exculpate myself, I was silenced, without any enquiries being made, with
‘Hold your tongue, you never tell truth.’ Even the very air I breathed was
tainted with scorn; for I was sent to the neighbouring shops with Glutton,
Liar, or Thief, written on my forehead. This was, at first, the most bitter
punishment; but sullen pride, or a kind of stupid desperation, made me, at
length, almost regardless of the contempt, which had wrung from me so many
solitary tears at the only moments when I was allowed to rest.


“Thus was I the mark of cruelty till my sixteenth year; and then I have only to
point out a change of misery; for a period I never knew. Allow me first to make
one observation. Now I look back, I cannot help attributing the greater part of
my misery, to the misfortune of having been thrown into the world without the
grand support of life—a mother’s affection. I had no one to love me; or to make
me respected, to enable me to acquire respect. I was an egg dropped on the
sand; a pauper by nature, hunted from family to family, who belonged to
nobody—and nobody cared for me. I was despised from my birth, and denied the
chance of obtaining a footing for myself in society. Yes; I had not even the
chance of being considered as a fellow-creature—yet all the people with whom I
lived, brutalized as they were by the low cunning of trade, and the despicable
shifts of poverty, were not without bowels, though they never yearned for me. I
was, in fact, born a slave, and chained by infamy to slavery during the whole
of existence, without having any companions to alleviate it by sympathy, or
teach me how to rise above it by their example. But, to resume the thread of my
tale—


“At sixteen, I suddenly grew tall, and something like comeliness appeared on a
Sunday, when I had time to wash my face, and put on clean clothes. My master
had once or twice caught hold of me in the passage; but I instinctively avoided
his disgusting caresses. One day however, when the family were at a methodist
meeting, he contrived to be alone in the house with me, and by blows—yes; blows
and menaces, compelled me to submit to his ferocious desire; and, to avoid my
mistress’s fury, I was obliged in future to comply, and skulk to my loft at his
command, in spite of increasing loathing.


“The anguish which was now pent up in my bosom, seemed to open a new world to
me: I began to extend my thoughts beyond myself, and grieve for human misery,
till I discovered, with horror—ah! what horror!—that I was with child. I know
not why I felt a mixed sensation of despair and tenderness, excepting that,
ever called a bastard, a bastard appeared to me an object of the greatest
compassion in creation.


“I communicated this dreadful circumstance to my master, who was almost equally
alarmed at the intelligence; for he feared his wife, and public censure at the
meeting. After some weeks of deliberation had elapsed, I in continual fear that
my altered shape would be noticed, my master gave me a medicine in a phial,
which he desired me to take, telling me, without any circumlocution, for what
purpose it was designed. I burst into tears, I thought it was killing
myself—yet was such a self as I worth preserving? He cursed me for a fool, and
left me to my own reflections. I could not resolve to take this infernal
potion; but I wrapped it up in an old gown, and hid it in a corner of my box.


“Nobody yet suspected me, because they had been accustomed to view me as a
creature of another species. But the threatening storm at last broke over my
devoted head—never shall I forget it! One Sunday evening when I was left, as
usual, to take care of the house, my master came home intoxicated, and I became
the prey of his brutal appetite. His extreme intoxication made him forget his
customary caution, and my mistress entered and found us in a situation that
could not have been more hateful to her than me. Her husband was ‘pot-valiant,’
he feared her not at the moment, nor had he then much reason, for she instantly
turned the whole force of her anger another way. She tore off my cap,
scratched, kicked, and buffetted me, till she had exhausted her strength,
declaring, as she rested her arm, ‘that I had wheedled her husband from
her.—But, could any thing better be expected from a wretch, whom she had taken
into her house out of pure charity?’ What a torrent of abuse rushed out? till,
almost breathless, she concluded with saying, ‘that I was born a strumpet; it
ran in my blood, and nothing good could come to those who harboured me.’


“My situation was, of course, discovered, and she declared that I should not
stay another night under the same roof with an honest family. I was therefore
pushed out of doors, and my trumpery thrown after me, when it had been
contemptuously examined in the passage, lest I should have stolen any thing.


“Behold me then in the street, utterly destitute! Whither could I creep for
shelter? To my father’s roof I had no claim, when not pursued by shame—now I
shrunk back as from death, from my mother’s cruel reproaches, my father’s
execrations. I could not endure to hear him curse the day I was born, though
life had been a curse to me. Of death I thought, but with a confused emotion of
terror, as I stood leaning my head on a post, and starting at every footstep,
lest it should be my mistress coming to tear my heart out. One of the boys of
the shop passing by, heard my tale, and immediately repaired to his master, to
give him a description of my situation; and he touched the right key—the
scandal it would give rise to, if I were left to repeat my tale to every
enquirer. This plea came home to his reason, who had been sobered by his wife’s
rage, the fury of which fell on him when I was out of her reach, and he sent
the boy to me with half-a-guinea, desiring him to conduct me to a house, where
beggars, and other wretches, the refuse of society, nightly lodged.


“This night was spent in a state of stupefaction, or desperation. I detested
mankind, and abhorred myself.


“In the morning I ventured out, to throw myself in my master’s way, at his
usual hour of going abroad. I approached him, he ‘damned me for a b——, declared
I had disturbed the peace of the family, and that he had sworn to his wife,
never to take any more notice of me.’ He left me; but, instantly returning, he
told me that he should speak to his friend, a parish-officer, to get a nurse
for the brat I laid to him; and advised me, if I wished to keep out of the
house of correction, not to make free with his name.


“I hurried back to my hole, and, rage giving place to despair, sought for the
potion that was to procure abortion, and swallowed it, with a wish that it
might destroy me, at the same time that it stopped the sensations of new-born
life, which I felt with indescribable emotion. My head turned round, my heart
grew sick, and in the horrors of approaching dissolution, mental anguish was
swallowed up. The effect of the medicine was violent, and I was confined to my
bed several days; but, youth and a strong constitution prevailing, I once more
crawled out, to ask myself the cruel question, ‘Whither I should go?’ I had but
two shillings left in my pocket, the rest had been expended, by a poor woman
who slept in the same room, to pay for my lodging, and purchase the necessaries
of which she partook.


“With this wretch I went into the neighbouring streets to beg, and my
disconsolate appearance drew a few pence from the idle, enabling me still to
command a bed; till, recovering from my illness, and taught to put on my rags
to the best advantage, I was accosted from different motives, and yielded to
the desire of the brutes I met, with the same detestation that I had felt for
my still more brutal master. I have since read in novels of the blandishments
of seduction, but I had not even the pleasure of being enticed into vice.


“I shall not,” interrupted Jemima, “lead your imagination into all the scenes
of wretchedness and depravity, which I was condemned to view; or mark the
different stages of my debasing misery. Fate dragged me through the very
kennels of society: I was still a slave, a bastard, a common property. Become
familiar with vice, for I wish to conceal nothing from you, I picked the
pockets of the drunkards who abused me; and proved by my conduct, that I
deserved the epithets, with which they loaded me at moments when distrust ought
to cease.


“Detesting my nightly occupation, though valuing, if I may so use the word, my
independence, which only consisted in choosing the street in which I should
wander, or the roof, when I had money, in which I should hide my head, I was
some time before I could prevail on myself to accept of a place in a house of
ill fame, to which a girl, with whom I had accidentally conversed in the
street, had recommended me. I had been hunted almost into a fever, by the
watchmen of the quarter of the town I frequented; one, whom I had unwittingly
offended, giving the word to the whole pack. You can scarcely conceive the
tyranny exercised by these wretches: considering themselves as the instruments
of the very laws they violate, the pretext which steels their conscience,
hardens their heart. Not content with receiving from us, outlaws of society
(let other women talk of favours) a brutal gratification gratuitously as a
privilege of office, they extort a tithe of prostitution, and harrass with
threats the poor creatures whose occupation affords not the means to silence
the growl of avarice. To escape from this persecution, I once more entered into
servitude.


“A life of comparative regularity restored my health; and—do not start—my
manners were improved, in a situation where vice sought to render itself
alluring, and taste was cultivated to fashion the person, if not to refine the
mind. Besides, the common civility of speech, contrasted with the gross
vulgarity to which I had been accustomed, was something like the polish of
civilization. I was not shut out from all intercourse of humanity. Still I was
galled by the yoke of service, and my mistress often flying into violent fits
of passion, made me dread a sudden dismission, which I understood was always
the case. I was therefore prevailed on, though I felt a horror of men, to
accept the offer of a gentleman, rather in the decline of years, to keep his
house, pleasantly situated in a little village near Hampstead.


“He was a man of great talents, and of brilliant wit; but, a worn-out votary of
voluptuousness, his desires became fastidious in proportion as they grew weak,
and the native tenderness of his heart was undermined by a vitiated
imagination. A thoughtless career of libertinism and social enjoyment, had
injured his health to such a degree, that, whatever pleasure his conversation
afforded me (and my esteem was ensured by proofs of the generous humanity of
his disposition), the being his mistress was purchasing it at a very dear rate.
With such a keen perception of the delicacies of sentiment, with an imagination
invigorated by the exercise of genius, how could he sink into the grossness of
sensuality!


“But, to pass over a subject which I recollect with pain, I must remark to you,
as an answer to your often-repeated question, ‘Why my sentiments and language
were superior to my station?’ that I now began to read, to beguile the
tediousness of solitude, and to gratify an inquisitive, active mind. I had
often, in my childhood, followed a ballad-singer, to hear the sequel of a
dismal story, though sure of being severely punished for delaying to return
with whatever I was sent to purchase. I could just spell and put a sentence
together, and I listened to the various arguments, though often mingled with
obscenity, which occurred at the table where I was allowed to preside: for a
literary friend or two frequently came home with my master, to dine and pass
the night. Having lost the privileged respect of my sex, my presence, instead
of restraining, perhaps gave the reins to their tongues; still I had the
advantage of hearing discussions, from which, in the common course of life,
women are excluded.


“You may easily imagine, that it was only by degrees that I could comprehend
some of the subjects they investigated, or acquire from their reasoning what
might be termed a moral sense. But my fondness of reading increasing, and my
master occasionally shutting himself up in this retreat, for weeks together, to
write, I had many opportunities of improvement. At first, considering money (I
was right!” exclaimed Jemima, altering her tone of voice) “as the only means,
after my loss of reputation, of obtaining respect, or even the toleration of
humanity, I had not the least scruple to secrete a part of the sums intrusted
to me, and to screen myself from detection by a system of falshood. But,
acquiring new principles, I began to have the ambition of returning to the
respectable part of society, and was weak enough to suppose it possible. The
attention of my unassuming instructor, who, without being ignorant of his own
powers, possessed great simplicity of manners, strengthened the illusion.
Having sometimes caught up hints for thought, from my untutored remarks, he
often led me to discuss the subjects he was treating, and would read to me his
productions, previous to their publication, wishing to profit by the criticism
of unsophisticated feeling. The aim of his writings was to touch the simple
springs of the heart; for he despised the would-be oracles, the self-elected
philosophers, who fright away fancy, while sifting each grain of thought to
prove that slowness of comprehension is wisdom.


“I should have distinguished this as a moment of sunshine, a happy period in my
life, had not the repugnance the disgusting libertinism of my protector
inspired, daily become more painful.—And, indeed, I soon did recollect it as
such with agony, when his sudden death (for he had recourse to the most
exhilarating cordials to keep up the convivial tone of his spirits) again threw
me into the desert of human society. Had he had any time for reflection, I am
certain he would have left the little property in his power to me: but,
attacked by the fatal apoplexy in town, his heir, a man of rigid morals,
brought his wife with him to take possession of the house and effects, before I
was even informed of his death,—‘to prevent,’ as she took care indirectly to
tell me, ‘such a creature as she supposed me to be, from purloining any of
them, had I been apprized of the event in time.’


“The grief I felt at the sudden shock the information gave me, which at first
had nothing selfish in it, was treated with contempt, and I was ordered to pack
up my clothes; and a few trinkets and books, given me by the generous deceased,
were contested, while they piously hoped, with a reprobating shake of the head,
‘that God would have mercy on his sinful soul!’ With some difficulty, I
obtained my arrears of wages; but asking—such is the spirit-grinding
consequence of poverty and infamy—for a character for honesty and economy,
which God knows I merited, I was told by this—why must I call her woman?—‘that
it would go against her conscience to recommend a kept mistress.’ Tears started
in my eyes, burning tears; for there are situations in which a wretch is
humbled by the contempt they are conscious they do not deserve.


“I returned to the metropolis; but the solitude of a poor lodging was
inconceivably dreary, after the society I had enjoyed. To be cut off from human
converse, now I had been taught to relish it, was to wander a ghost among the
living. Besides, I foresaw, to aggravate the severity of my fate, that my
little pittance would soon melt away. I endeavoured to obtain needlework; but,
not having been taught early, and my hands being rendered clumsy by hard work,
I did not sufficiently excel to be employed by the ready-made linen shops, when
so many women, better qualified, were suing for it. The want of a character
prevented my getting a place; for, irksome as servitude would have been to me,
I should have made another trial, had it been feasible. Not that I disliked
employment, but the inequality of condition to which I must have submitted. I
had acquired a taste for literature, during the five years I had lived with a
literary man, occasionally conversing with men of the first abilities of the
age; and now to descend to the lowest vulgarity, was a degree of wretchedness
not to be imagined unfelt. I had not, it is true, tasted the charms of
affection, but I had been familiar with the graces of humanity.


“One of the gentlemen, whom I had frequently dined in company with, while I was
treated like a companion, met me in the street, and enquired after my health. I
seized the occasion, and began to describe my situation; but he was in haste to
join, at dinner, a select party of choice spirits; therefore, without waiting
to hear me, he impatiently put a guinea into my hand, saying, ‘It was a pity
such a sensible woman should be in distress—he wished me well from his soul.’


“To another I wrote, stating my case, and requesting advice. He was an advocate
for unequivocal sincerity; and had often, in my presence, descanted on the
evils which arise in society from the despotism of rank and riches.


“In reply, I received a long essay on the energy of the human mind, with
continual allusions to his own force of character. He added, ‘That the woman
who could write such a letter as I had sent him, could never be in want of
resources, were she to look into herself, and exert her powers; misery was the
consequence of indolence, and, as to my being shut out from society, it was the
lot of man to submit to certain privations.’


“How often have I heard,” said Jemima, interrupting her narrative, “in
conversation, and read in books, that every person willing to work may find
employment? It is the vague assertion, I believe, of insensible indolence, when
it relates to men; but, with respect to women, I am sure of its fallacy, unless
they will submit to the most menial bodily labour; and even to be employed at
hard labour is out of the reach of many, whose reputation misfortune or folly
has tainted.


“How writers, professing to be friends to freedom, and the improvement of
morals, can assert that poverty is no evil, I cannot imagine.”


“No more can I,” interrupted Maria, “yet they even expatiate on the peculiar
happiness of indigence, though in what it can consist, excepting in brutal
rest, when a man can barely earn a subsistence, I cannot imagine. The mind is
necessarily imprisoned in its own little tenement; and, fully occupied by
keeping it in repair, has not time to rove abroad for improvement. The book of
knowledge is closely clasped, against those who must fulfil their daily task of
severe manual labour or die; and curiosity, rarely excited by thought or
information, seldom moves on the stagnate lake of ignorance.”


“As far as I have been able to observe,” replied Jemima, “prejudices, caught up
by chance, are obstinately maintained by the poor, to the exclusion of
improvement; they have not time to reason or reflect to any extent, or minds
sufficiently exercised to adopt the principles of action, which form perhaps
the only basis of contentment in every station.”[6]


 [6]
The copy which appears to have received the author’s last corrections, ends at
this place. [Godwin’s note]


“And independence,” said Darnford, “they are necessarily strangers to, even the
independence of despising their persecutors. If the poor are happy, or can be
happy, things are very well as they are. And I cannot conceive on what
principle those writers contend for a change of system, who support this
opinion. The authors on the other side of the question are much more
consistent, who grant the fact; yet, insisting that it is the lot of the
majority to be oppressed in this life, kindly turn them over to another, to
rectify the false weights and measures of this, as the only way to justify the
dispensations of Providence. I have not,” continued Darnford, “an opinion more
firmly fixed by observation in my mind, than that, though riches may fail to
produce proportionate happiness, poverty most commonly excludes it, by shutting
up all the avenues to improvement.”


“And as for the affections,” added Maria, with a sigh, “how gross, and even
tormenting do they become, unless regulated by an improving mind! The culture
of the heart ever, I believe, keeps pace with that of the mind. But pray go
on,” addressing Jemima, “though your narrative gives rise to the most painful
reflections on the present state of society.”


“Not to trouble you,” continued she, “with a detailed description of all the
painful feelings of unavailing exertion, I have only to tell you, that at last
I got recommended to wash in a few families, who did me the favour to admit me
into their houses, without the most strict enquiry, to wash from one in the
morning till eight at night, for eighteen or twenty-pence a day. On the
happiness to be enjoyed over a washing-tub I need not comment; yet you will
allow me to observe, that this was a wretchedness of situation peculiar to my
sex. A man with half my industry, and, I may say, abilities, could have
procured a decent livelihood, and discharged some of the duties which knit
mankind together; whilst I, who had acquired a taste for the rational, nay, in
honest pride let me assert it, the virtuous enjoyments of life, was cast aside
as the filth of society. Condemned to labour, like a machine, only to earn
bread, and scarcely that, I became melancholy and desperate.


“I have now to mention a circumstance which fills me with remorse, and fear it
will entirely deprive me of your esteem. A tradesman became attached to me, and
visited me frequently,—and I at last obtained such a power over him, that he
offered to take me home to his house.—Consider, dear madam, I was famishing:
wonder not that I became a wolf!—The only reason for not taking me home
immediately, was the having a girl in the house, with child by him—and this
girl—I advised him—yes, I did! would I could forget it!—to turn out of doors:
and one night he determined to follow my advice. Poor wretch! She fell upon her
knees, reminded him that he had promised to marry her, that her parents were
honest!—What did it avail?—She was turned out.


“She approached her father’s door, in the skirts of London,—listened at the
shutters,—but could not knock. A watchman had observed her go and return
several times—Poor wretch!—[The remorse Jemima spoke of, seemed to be stinging
her to the soul, as she proceeded.]


“She left it, and, approaching a tub where horses were watered, she sat down in
it, and, with desperate resolution, remained in that attitude—till resolution
was no longer necessary!


“I happened that morning to be going out to wash, anticipating the moment when
I should escape from such hard labour. I passed by, just as some men, going to
work, drew out the stiff, cold corpse—Let me not recall the horrid moment!—I
recognized her pale visage; I listened to the tale told by the spectators, and
my heart did not burst. I thought of my own state, and wondered how I could be
such a monster!—I worked hard; and, returning home, I was attacked by a fever.
I suffered both in body and mind. I determined not to live with the wretch. But
he did not try me; he left the neighbourhood. I once more returned to the
wash-tub.


“Still this state, miserable as it was, admitted of aggravation. Lifting one
day a heavy load, a tub fell against my shin, and gave me great pain. I did not
pay much attention to the hurt, till it became a serious wound; being obliged
to work as usual, or starve. But, finding myself at length unable to stand for
any time, I thought of getting into an hospital. Hospitals, it should seem (for
they are comfortless abodes for the sick) were expressly endowed for the
reception of the friendless; yet I, who had on that plea a right to assistance,
wanted the recommendation of the rich and respectable, and was several weeks
languishing for admittance; fees were demanded on entering; and, what was still
more unreasonable, security for burying me, that expence not coming into the
letter of the charity. A guinea was the stipulated sum—I could as soon have
raised a million; and I was afraid to apply to the parish for an order, lest
they should have passed me, I knew not whither. The poor woman at whose house I
lodged, compassionating my state, got me into the hospital; and the family
where I received the hurt, sent me five shillings, three and six-pence of which
I gave at my admittance—I know not for what.


“My leg grew quickly better; but I was dismissed before my cure was completed,
because I could not afford to have my linen washed to appear decently, as the
virago of a nurse said, when the gentlemen (the surgeons) came. I cannot give
you an adequate idea of the wretchedness of an hospital; every thing is left to
the care of people intent on gain. The attendants seem to have lost all feeling
of compassion in the bustling discharge of their offices; death is so familiar
to them, that they are not anxious to ward it off. Every thing appeared to be
conducted for the accommodation of the medical men and their pupils, who came
to make experiments on the poor, for the benefit of the rich. One of the
physicians, I must not forget to mention, gave me half-a-crown, and ordered me
some wine, when I was at the lowest ebb. I thought of making my case known to
the lady-like matron; but her forbidding countenance prevented me. She
condescended to look on the patients, and make general enquiries, two or three
times a week; but the nurses knew the hour when the visit of ceremony would
commence, and every thing was as it should be.


“After my dismission, I was more at a loss than ever for a subsistence, and,
not to weary you with a repetition of the same unavailing attempts, unable to
stand at the washing-tub, I began to consider the rich and poor as natural
enemies, and became a thief from principle. I could not now cease to reason,
but I hated mankind. I despised myself, yet I justified my conduct. I was
taken, tried, and condemned to six months’ imprisonment in a house of
correction. My soul recoils with horror from the remembrance of the insults I
had to endure, till, branded with shame, I was turned loose in the street,
pennyless. I wandered from street to street, till, exhausted by hunger and
fatigue, I sunk down senseless at a door, where I had vainly demanded a morsel
of bread. I was sent by the inhabitant to the work-house, to which he had
surlily bid me go, saying, he ‘paid enough in conscience to the poor,’ when,
with parched tongue, I implored his charity. If those well-meaning people who
exclaim against beggars, were acquainted with the treatment the poor receive in
many of these wretched asylums, they would not stifle so easily involuntary
sympathy, by saying that they have all parishes to go to, or wonder that the
poor dread to enter the gloomy walls. What are the common run of workhouses,
but prisons, in which many respectable old people, worn out by immoderate
labour, sink into the grave in sorrow, to which they are carried like dogs!”


Alarmed by some indistinct noise, Jemima rose hastily to listen, and Maria,
turning to Darnford, said, “I have indeed been shocked beyond expression when I
have met a pauper’s funeral. A coffin carried on the shoulders of three or four
ill-looking wretches, whom the imagination might easily convert into a band of
assassins, hastening to conceal the corpse, and quarrelling about the prey on
their way. I know it is of little consequence how we are consigned to the
earth; but I am led by this brutal insensibility, to what even the animal
creation appears forcibly to feel, to advert to the wretched, deserted manner
in which they died.”


“True,” rejoined Darnford, “and, till the rich will give more than a part of
their wealth, till they will give time and attention to the wants of the
distressed, never let them boast of charity. Let them open their hearts, and
not their purses, and employ their minds in the service, if they are really
actuated by humanity; or charitable institutions will always be the prey of the
lowest order of knaves.”


Jemima returning, seemed in haste to finish her tale. “The overseer farmed the
poor of different parishes, and out of the bowels of poverty was wrung the
money with which he purchased this dwelling, as a private receptacle for
madness. He had been a keeper at a house of the same description, and conceived
that he could make money much more readily in his old occupation. He is a
shrewd—shall I say it?—villain. He observed something resolute in my manner,
and offered to take me with him, and instruct me how to treat the disturbed
minds he meant to intrust to my care. The offer of forty pounds a year, and to
quit a workhouse, was not to be despised, though the condition of shutting my
eyes and hardening my heart was annexed to it.


“I agreed to accompany him; and four years have I been attendant on many
wretches, and”—she lowered her voice,—“the witness of many enormities. In
solitude my mind seemed to recover its force, and many of the sentiments which
I imbibed in the only tolerable period of my life, returned with their full
force. Still what should induce me to be the champion for suffering
humanity?—Who ever risked any thing for me?—Who ever acknowledged me to be a
fellow-creature?”—


Maria took her hand, and Jemima, more overcome by kindness than she had ever
been by cruelty, hastened out of the room to conceal her emotions.


Darnford soon after heard his summons, and, taking leave of him, Maria promised
to gratify his curiosity, with respect to herself, the first opportunity.

</div></body></text></TEI>