<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="27">
CHAPTER IV.

Our escort had been directed to prepare our abode for the night at the inn,
opposite the ascent to the Castle. We could not again visit the halls and
familiar chambers of our home, on a mere visit. We had already left for ever
the glades of Windsor, and all of coppice, flowery hedgerow, and murmuring
stream, which gave shape and intensity to the love of our country, and the
almost superstitious attachment with which we regarded native England. It had
been our intention to have called at Lucy’s dwelling in Datchet, and to
have re-assured her with promises of aid and protection before we repaired to
our quarters for the night. Now, as the Countess of Windsor and I turned down
the steep hill that led from the Castle, we saw the children, who had just
stopped in their caravan, at the inn-door. They had passed through Datchet
without halting. I dreaded to meet them, and to be the bearer of my tragic
story, so while they were still occupied in the hurry of arrival, I suddenly
left them, and through the snow and clear moon-light air, hastened along the
well known road to Datchet.


Well known indeed it was. Each cottage stood on its accustomed site, each tree
wore its familiar appearance. Habit had graven uneraseably on my memory, every
turn and change of object on the road. At a short distance beyond the Little
Park, was an elm half blown down by a storm, some ten years ago; and still,
with leafless snow-laden branches, it stretched across the pathway, which wound
through a meadow, beside a shallow brook, whose brawling was silenced by
frost—that stile, that white gate, that hollow oak tree, which doubtless
once belonged to the forest, and which now shewed in the moonlight its gaping
rent; to whose fanciful appearance, tricked out by the dusk into a resemblance
of the human form, the children had given the name of Falstaff;—all these
objects were as well known to me as the cold hearth of my deserted home, and
every moss-grown wall and plot of orchard ground, alike as twin lambs are to
each other in a stranger’s eye, yet to my accustomed gaze bore
differences, distinction, and a name. England remained, though England was
dead—it was the ghost of merry England that I beheld, under those
greenwood shade passing generations had sported in security and ease. To this
painful recognition of familiar places, was added a feeling experienced by all,
understood by none—a feeling as if in some state, less visionary than a
dream, in some past real existence, I had seen all I saw, with precisely the
same feelings as I now beheld them—as if all my sensations were a duplex
mirror of a former revelation. To get rid of this oppressive sense I strove to
imagine change in this tranquil spot—this augmented my mood, by causing
me to bestow more attention on the objects which occasioned me pain.


I reached Datchet and Lucy’s humble abode—once noisy with Saturday
night revellers, or trim and neat on Sunday morning it had borne testimony to
the labours and orderly habits of the housewife. The snow lay high about the
door, as if it had remained unclosed for many days.


“What scene of death hath Roscius now to act?”


I muttered to myself as I looked at the dark casements. At first I thought I
saw a light in one of them, but it proved to be merely the refraction of the
moon-beams, while the only sound was the crackling branches as the breeze
whirred the snow flakes from them—the moon sailed high and unclouded in
the interminable ether, while the shadow of the cottage lay black on the garden
behind. I entered this by the open wicket, and anxiously examined each window.
At length I detected a ray of light struggling through a closed shutter in one
of the upper rooms—it was a novel feeling, alas! to look at any house and
say there dwells its usual inmate—the door of the house was merely on the
latch: so I entered and ascended the moon-lit staircase. The door of the
inhabited room was ajar: looking in, I saw Lucy sitting as at work at the table
on which the light stood; the implements of needlework were about her, but her
hand had fallen on her lap, and her eyes, fixed on the ground, shewed by their
vacancy that her thoughts wandered. Traces of care and watching had diminished
her former attractions—but her simple dress and cap, her desponding
attitude, and the single candle that cast its light upon her, gave for a moment
a picturesque grouping to the whole. A fearful reality recalled me from the
thought—a figure lay stretched on the bed covered by a sheet—her
mother was dead, and Lucy, apart from all the world, deserted and alone,
watched beside the corpse during the weary night. I entered the room, and my
unexpected appearance at first drew a scream from the lone survivor of a dead
nation; but she recognised me, and recovered herself, with the quick exercise
of self-control habitual to her. “Did you not expect me?” I asked,
in that low voice which the presence of the dead makes us as it were
instinctively assume.


“You are very good,” replied she, “to have come yourself; I
can never thank you sufficiently; but it is too late.”


“Too late,” cried I, “what do you mean? It is not too late to
take you from this deserted place, and conduct you to—-”


My own loss, which I had forgotten as I spoke, now made me turn away, while
choking grief impeded my speech. I threw open the window, and looked on the
cold, waning, ghastly, misshaped circle on high, and the chill white earth
beneath—did the spirit of sweet Idris sail along the moon-frozen crystal
air?—No, no, a more genial atmosphere, a lovelier habitation was surely
hers!


I indulged in this meditation for a moment, and then again addressed the
mourner, who stood leaning against the bed with that expression of resigned
despair, of complete misery, and a patient sufferance of it, which is far more
touching than any of the insane ravings or wild gesticulation of untamed
sorrow. I desired to draw her from this spot; but she opposed my wish. That
class of persons whose imagination and sensibility have never been taken out of
the narrow circle immediately in view, if they possess these qualities to any
extent, are apt to pour their influence into the very realities which appear to
destroy them, and to cling to these with double tenacity from not being able to
comprehend any thing beyond. Thus Lucy, in desert England, in a dead world,
wished to fulfil the usual ceremonies of the dead, such as were customary to
the English country people, when death was a rare visitant, and gave us time to
receive his dreaded usurpation with pomp and circumstance—going forth in
procession to deliver the keys of the tomb into his conquering hand. She had
already, alone as she was, accomplished some of these, and the work on which I
found her employed, was her mother’s shroud. My heart sickened at such
detail of woe, which a female can endure, but which is more painful to the
masculine spirit than deadliest struggle, or throes of unutterable but
transient agony.


This must not be, I told her; and then, as further inducement, I communicated
to her my recent loss, and gave her the idea that she must come with me to take
charge of the orphan children, whom the death of Idris had deprived of a
mother’s care. Lucy never resisted the call of a duty, so she yielded,
and closing the casements and doors with care, she accompanied me back to
Windsor. As we went she communicated to me the occasion of her mother’s
death. Either by some mischance she had got sight of Lucy’s letter to
Idris, or she had overheard her conversation with the countryman who bore it;
however it might be, she obtained a knowledge of the appalling situation of
herself and her daughter, her aged frame could not sustain the anxiety and
horror this discovery instilled—she concealed her knowledge from Lucy,
but brooded over it through sleepless nights, till fever and delirium, swift
forerunners of death, disclosed the secret. Her life, which had long been
hovering on its extinction, now yielded at once to the united effects of misery
and sickness, and that same morning she had died.


After the tumultuous emotions of the day, I was glad to find on my arrival at
the inn that my companions had retired to rest. I gave Lucy in charge to the
Countess’s attendant, and then sought repose from my various struggles
and impatient regrets. For a few moments the events of the day floated in
disastrous pageant through my brain, till sleep bathed it in forgetfulness;
when morning dawned and I awoke, it seemed as if my slumber had endured for
years.


My companions had not shared my oblivion. Clara’s swollen eyes shewed
that she had passed the night in weeping. The Countess looked haggard and wan.
Her firm spirit had not found relief in tears, and she suffered the more from
all the painful retrospect and agonizing regret that now occupied her. We
departed from Windsor, as soon as the burial rites had been performed for
Lucy’s mother, and, urged on by an impatient desire to change the scene,
went forward towards Dover with speed, our escort having gone before to provide
horses; finding them either in the warm stables they instinctively sought
during the cold weather, or standing shivering in the bleak fields ready to
surrender their liberty in exchange for offered corn.


During our ride the Countess recounted to me the extraordinary circumstances
which had brought her so strangely to my side in the chancel of St.
George’s chapel. When last she had taken leave of Idris, as she looked
anxiously on her faded person and pallid countenance, she had suddenly been
visited by a conviction that she saw her for the last time. It was hard to part
with her while under the dominion of this sentiment, and for the last time she
endeavoured to persuade her daughter to commit herself to her nursing,
permitting me to join Adrian. Idris mildly refused, and thus they separated.
The idea that they should never again meet grew on the Countess’s mind,
and haunted her perpetually; a thousand times she had resolved to turn back and
join us, and was again and again restrained by the pride and anger of which she
was the slave. Proud of heart as she was, she bathed her pillow with nightly
tears, and through the day was subdued by nervous agitation and expectation of
the dreaded event, which she was wholly incapable of curbing. She confessed
that at this period her hatred of me knew no bounds, since she considered me as
the sole obstacle to the fulfilment of her dearest wish, that of attending upon
her daughter in her last moments. She desired to express her fears to her son,
and to seek consolation from his sympathy with, or courage from his rejection
of, her auguries.


On the first day of her arrival at Dover she walked with him on the sea beach,
and with the timidity characteristic of passionate and exaggerated feeling was
by degrees bringing the conversation to the desired point, when she could
communicate her fears to him, when the messenger who bore my letter announcing
our temporary return to Windsor, came riding down to them. He gave some oral
account of how he had left us, and added, that notwithstanding the cheerfulness
and good courage of Lady Idris, he was afraid that she would hardly reach
Windsor alive. “True,” said the Countess, “your fears are
just, she is about to expire!”


As she spoke, her eyes were fixed on a tomblike hollow of the cliff, and she
saw, she averred the same to me with solemnity, Idris pacing slowly towards
this cave. She was turned from her, her head was bent down, her white dress was
such as she was accustomed to wear, except that a thin crape-like veil covered
her golden tresses, and concealed her as a dim transparent mist. She looked
dejected, as docilely yielding to a commanding power; she submissively entered,
and was lost in the dark recess.


“Were I subject to visionary moods,” said the venerable lady, as
she continued her narrative, “I might doubt my eyes, and condemn my
credulity; but reality is the world I live in, and what I saw I doubt not had
existence beyond myself. From that moment I could not rest; it was worth my
existence to see her once again before she died; I knew that I should not
accomplish this, yet I must endeavour. I immediately departed for Windsor; and,
though I was assured that we travelled speedily, it seemed to me that our
progress was snail-like, and that delays were created solely for my annoyance.
Still I accused you, and heaped on your head the fiery ashes of my burning
impatience. It was no disappointment, though an agonizing pang, when you
pointed to her last abode; and words would ill express the abhorrence I that
moment felt towards you, the triumphant impediment to my dearest wishes. I saw
her, and anger, and hate, and injustice died at her bier, giving place at their
departure to a remorse (Great God, that I should feel it!) which must last
while memory and feeling endure.”


To medicine such remorse, to prevent awakening love and new-born mildness from
producing the same bitter fruit that hate and harshness had done, I devoted all
my endeavours to soothe the venerable penitent. Our party was a melancholy one;
each was possessed by regret for what was remediless; for the absence of his
mother shadowed even the infant gaiety of Evelyn. Added to this was the
prospect of the uncertain future. Before the final accomplishment of any great
voluntary change the mind vacillates, now soothing itself by fervent
expectation, now recoiling from obstacles which seem never to have presented
themselves before with so frightful an aspect. An involuntary tremor ran
through me when I thought that in another day we might have crossed the watery
barrier, and have set forward on that hopeless, interminable, sad wandering,
which but a short time before I regarded as the only relief to sorrow that our
situation afforded.


Our approach to Dover was announced by the loud roarings of the wintry sea.
They were borne miles inland by the sound-laden blast, and by their
unaccustomed uproar, imparted a feeling of insecurity and peril to our stable
abode. At first we hardly permitted ourselves to think that any unusual
eruption of nature caused this tremendous war of air and water, but rather
fancied that we merely listened to what we had heard a thousand times before,
when we had watched the flocks of fleece-crowned waves, driven by the winds,
come to lament and die on the barren sands and pointed rocks. But we found upon
advancing farther, that Dover was overflowed— many of the houses were
overthrown by the surges which filled the streets, and with hideous brawlings
sometimes retreated leaving the pavement of the town bare, till again hurried
forward by the influx of ocean, they returned with thunder-sound to their
usurped station.


Hardly less disturbed than the tempestuous world of waters was the assembly of
human beings, that from the cliff fearfully watched its ravings. On the morning
of the arrival of the emigrants under the conduct of Adrian, the sea had been
serene and glassy, the slight ripples refracted the sunbeams, which shed their
radiance through the clear blue frosty air. This placid appearance of nature
was hailed as a good augury for the voyage, and the chief immediately repaired
to the harbour to examine two steamboats which were moored there. On the
following midnight, when all were at rest, a frightful storm of wind and
clattering rain and hail first disturbed them, and the voice of one shrieking
in the streets, that the sleepers must awake or they would be drowned; and when
they rushed out, half clothed, to discover the meaning of this alarm, they
found that the tide, rising above every mark, was rushing into the town. They
ascended the cliff, but the darkness permitted only the white crest of waves to
be seen, while the roaring wind mingled its howlings in dire accord with the
wild surges. The awful hour of night, the utter inexperience of many who had
never seen the sea before, the wailing of women and cries of children added to
the horror of the tumult. All the following day the same scene continued. When
the tide ebbed, the town was left dry; but on its flow, it rose even higher
than on the preceding night. The vast ships that lay rotting in the roads were
whirled from their anchorage, and driven and jammed against the cliff, the
vessels in the harbour were flung on land like sea-weed, and there battered to
pieces by the breakers. The waves dashed against the cliff, which if in any
place it had been before loosened, now gave way, and the affrighted crowd saw
vast fragments of the near earth fall with crash and roar into the deep. This
sight operated differently on different persons. The greater part thought it a
judgment of God, to prevent or punish our emigration from our native land. Many
were doubly eager to quit a nook of ground now become their prison, which
appeared unable to resist the inroads of ocean’s giant waves.


When we arrived at Dover, after a fatiguing day’s journey, we all
required rest and sleep; but the scene acting around us soon drove away such
ideas. We were drawn, along with the greater part of our companions, to the
edge of the cliff, there to listen to and make a thousand conjectures. A fog
narrowed our horizon to about a quarter of a mile, and the misty veil, cold and
dense, enveloped sky and sea in equal obscurity. What added to our inquietude
was the circumstance that two-thirds of our original number were now waiting
for us in Paris, and clinging, as we now did most painfully, to any addition to
our melancholy remnant, this division, with the tameless impassable ocean
between, struck us with affright. At length, after loitering for several hours
on the cliff, we retired to Dover Castle, whose roof sheltered all who breathed
the English air, and sought the sleep necessary to restore strength and courage
to our worn frames and languid spirits.


Early in the morning Adrian brought me the welcome intelligence that the wind
had changed: it had been south-west; it was now north-east. The sky was
stripped bare of clouds by the increasing gale, while the tide at its ebb
seceded entirely from the town. The change of wind rather increased the fury of
the sea, but it altered its late dusky hue to a bright green; and in spite of
its unmitigated clamour, its more cheerful appearance instilled hope and
pleasure. All day we watched the ranging of the mountainous waves, and towards
sunset a desire to decypher the promise for the morrow at its setting, made us
all gather with one accord on the edge of the cliff. When the mighty luminary
approached within a few degrees of the tempest-tossed horizon, suddenly, a
wonder! three other suns, alike burning and brilliant, rushed from various
quarters of the heavens towards the great orb; they whirled round it. The glare
of light was intense to our dazzled eyes; the sun itself seemed to join in the
dance, while the sea burned like a furnace, like all Vesuvius a-light, with
flowing lava beneath. The horses broke loose from their stalls in
terror—a herd of cattle, panic struck, raced down to the brink of the
cliff, and blinded by light, plunged down with frightful yells in the waves
below. The time occupied by the apparition of these meteors was comparatively
short; suddenly the three mock suns united in one, and plunged into the sea. A
few seconds afterwards, a deafening watery sound came up with awful peal from
the spot where they had disappeared.


Meanwhile the sun, disencumbered from his strange satellites, paced with its
accustomed majesty towards its western home. When—we dared not trust our
eyes late dazzled, but it seemed that—the sea rose to meet it—it
mounted higher and higher, till the fiery globe was obscured, and the wall of
water still ascended the horizon; it appeared as if suddenly the motion of
earth was revealed to us—as if no longer we were ruled by ancient laws,
but were turned adrift in an unknown region of space. Many cried aloud, that
these were no meteors, but globes of burning matter, which had set fire to the
earth, and caused the vast cauldron at our feet to bubble up with its
measureless waves; the day of judgment was come they averred, and a few moments
would transport us before the awful countenance of the omnipotent judge; while
those less given to visionary terrors, declared that two conflicting gales had
occasioned the last phaenomenon. In support of this opinion they pointed out
the fact that the east wind died away, while the rushing of the coming west
mingled its wild howl with the roar of the advancing waters. Would the cliff
resist this new battery? Was not the giant wave far higher than the precipice?
Would not our little island be deluged by its approach? The crowd of spectators
fled. They were dispersed over the fields, stopping now and then, and looking
back in terror. A sublime sense of awe calmed the swift pulsations of my
heart—I awaited the approach of the destruction menaced, with that solemn
resignation which an unavoidable necessity instils. The ocean every moment
assumed a more terrific aspect, while the twilight was dimmed by the rack which
the west wind spread over the sky. By slow degrees however, as the wave
advanced, it took a more mild appearance; some under current of air, or
obstruction in the bed of the waters, checked its progress, and it sank
gradually; while the surface of the sea became uniformly higher as it dissolved
into it. This change took from us the fear of an immediate catastrophe,
although we were still anxious as to the final result. We continued during the
whole night to watch the fury of the sea and the pace of the driving clouds,
through whose openings the rare stars rushed impetuously; the thunder of
conflicting elements deprived us of all power to sleep.


This endured ceaselessly for three days and nights. The stoutest hearts quailed
before the savage enmity of nature; provisions began to fail us, though every
day foraging parties were dispersed to the nearer towns. In vain we schooled
ourselves into the belief, that there was nothing out of the common order of
nature in the strife we witnessed; our disasterous and overwhelming destiny
turned the best of us to cowards. Death had hunted us through the course of
many months, even to the narrow strip of time on which we now stood; narrow
indeed, and buffeted by storms, was our footway overhanging the great sea of
calamity—


        As an unsheltered northern shore
Is shaken by the wintry wave—
And frequent storms for evermore,
(While from the west the loud winds rave,
Or from the east, or mountains hoar)
The struck and tott’ring sand-bank lave.[21]


It required more than human energy to bear up against the menaces of
destruction that every where surrounded us.


After the lapse of three days, the gale died away, the sea-gull sailed upon the
calm bosom of the windless atmosphere, and the last yellow leaf on the topmost
branch of the oak hung without motion. The sea no longer broke with fury; but a
swell setting in steadily for shore, with long sweep and sullen burst replaced
the roar of the breakers. Yet we derived hope from the change, and we did not
doubt that after the interval of a few days the sea would resume its
tranquillity. The sunset of the fourth day favoured this idea; it was clear and
golden. As we gazed on the purple sea, radiant beneath, we were attracted by a
novel spectacle; a dark speck—as it neared, visibly a boat—rode on
the top of the waves, every now and then lost in the steep vallies between. We
marked its course with eager questionings; and, when we saw that it evidently
made for shore, we descended to the only practicable landing place, and hoisted
a signal to direct them. By the help of glasses we distinguished her crew; it
consisted of nine men, Englishmen, belonging in truth to the two divisions of
our people, who had preceded us, and had been for several weeks at Paris. As
countryman was wont to meet countryman in distant lands, did we greet our
visitors on their landing, with outstretched hands and gladsome welcome. They
were slow to reciprocate our gratulations. They looked angry and resentful; not
less than the chafed sea which they had traversed with imminent peril, though
apparently more displeased with each other than with us. It was strange to see
these human beings, who appeared to be given forth by the earth like rare and
inestimable plants, full of towering passion, and the spirit of angry contest.
Their first demand was to be conducted to the Lord Protector of England, so
they called Adrian, though he had long discarded the empty title, as a bitter
mockery of the shadow to which the Protectorship was now reduced. They were
speedily led to Dover Castle, from whose keep Adrian had watched the movements
of the boat. He received them with the interest and wonder so strange a
visitation created. In the confusion occasioned by their angry demands for
precedence, it was long before we could discover the secret meaning of this
strange scene. By degrees, from the furious declamations of one, the fierce
interruptions of another, and the bitter scoffs of a third, we found that they
were deputies from our colony at Paris, from three parties there formed, who,
each with angry rivalry, tried to attain a superiority over the other two.
These deputies had been dispatched by them to Adrian, who had been selected
arbiter; and they had journied from Paris to Calais, through the vacant towns
and desolate country, indulging the while violent hatred against each other;
and now they pleaded their several causes with unmitigated party-spirit.


By examining the deputies apart, and after much investigation, we learnt the
true state of things at Paris. Since parliament had elected him Ryland’s
deputy, all the surviving English had submitted to Adrian. He was our captain
to lead us from our native soil to unknown lands, our lawgiver and our
preserver. On the first arrangement of our scheme of emigration, no continued
separation of our members was contemplated, and the command of the whole body
in gradual ascent of power had its apex in the Earl of Windsor. But unforeseen
circumstances changed our plans for us, and occasioned the greater part of our
numbers to be divided for the space of nearly two months, from the supreme
chief. They had gone over in two distinct bodies; and on their arrival at Paris
dissension arose between them.


They had found Paris a desert. When first the plague had appeared, the return
of travellers and merchants, and communications by letter, informed us
regularly of the ravages made by disease on the continent. But with the
encreased mortality this intercourse declined and ceased. Even in England
itself communication from one part of the island to the other became slow and
rare. No vessel stemmed the flood that divided Calais from Dover; or if some
melancholy voyager, wishing to assure himself of the life or death of his
relatives, put from the French shore to return among us, often the greedy ocean
swallowed his little craft, or after a day or two he was infected by the
disorder, and died before he could tell the tale of the desolation of France.
We were therefore to a great degree ignorant of the state of things on the
continent, and were not without some vague hope of finding numerous companions
in its wide track. But the same causes that had so fearfully diminished the
English nation had had even greater scope for mischief in the sister land.
France was a blank; during the long line of road from Calais to Paris not one
human being was found. In Paris there were a few, perhaps a hundred, who,
resigned to their coming fate, flitted about the streets of the capital and
assembled to converse of past times, with that vivacity and even gaiety that
seldom deserts the individuals of this nation.


The English took uncontested possession of Paris. Its high houses and narrow
streets were lifeless. A few pale figures were to be distinguished at the
accustomed resort at the Tuileries; they wondered wherefore the islanders
should approach their ill-fated city—for in the excess of wretchedness,
the sufferers always imagine, that their part of the calamity is the bitterest,
as, when enduring intense pain, we would exchange the particular torture we
writhe under, for any other which should visit a different part of the frame.
They listened to the account the emigrants gave of their motives for leaving
their native land, with a shrug almost of disdain—“Return,”
they said, “return to your island, whose sea breezes, and division from
the continent gives some promise of health; if Pestilence among you has slain
its hundreds, with us it has slain its thousands. Are you not even now more
numerous than we are?—A year ago you would have found only the sick
burying the dead; now we are happier; for the pang of struggle has passed away,
and the few you find here are patiently waiting the final blow. But you, who
are not content to die, breathe no longer the air of France, or soon you will
only be a part of her soil.”


Thus, by menaces of the sword, they would have driven back those who had
escaped from fire. But the peril left behind was deemed imminent by my
countrymen; that before them doubtful and distant; and soon other feelings
arose to obliterate fear, or to replace it by passions, that ought to have had
no place among a brotherhood of unhappy survivors of the expiring world.


The more numerous division of emigrants, which arrived first at Paris, assumed
a superiority of rank and power; the second party asserted their independence.
A third was formed by a sectarian, a self-erected prophet, who, while he
attributed all power and rule to God, strove to get the real command of his
comrades into his own hands. This third division consisted of fewest
individuals, but their purpose was more one, their obedience to their leader
more entire, their fortitude and courage more unyielding and active.


During the whole progress of the plague, the teachers of religion were in
possession of great power; a power of good, if rightly directed, or of
incalculable mischief, if fanaticism or intolerance guided their efforts. In
the present instance, a worse feeling than either of these actuated the leader.
He was an impostor in the most determined sense of the term. A man who had in
early life lost, through the indulgence of vicious propensities, all sense of
rectitude or self-esteem; and who, when ambition was awakened in him, gave
himself up to its influence unbridled by any scruple. His father had been a
methodist preacher, an enthusiastic man with simple intentions; but whose
pernicious doctrines of election and special grace had contributed to destroy
all conscientious feeling in his son. During the progress of the pestilence he
had entered upon various schemes, by which to acquire adherents and power.
Adrian had discovered and defeated these attempts; but Adrian was absent; the
wolf assumed the shepherd’s garb, and the flock admitted the deception:
he had formed a party during the few weeks he had been in Paris, who zealously
propagated the creed of his divine mission, and believed that safety and
salvation were to be afforded only to those who put their trust in him.


When once the spirit of dissension had arisen, the most frivolous causes gave
it activity. The first party, on arriving at Paris, had taken possession of the
Tuileries; chance and friendly feeling had induced the second to lodge near to
them. A contest arose concerning the distribution of the pillage; the chiefs of
the first division demanded that the whole should be placed at their disposal;
with this assumption the opposite party refused to comply. When next the latter
went to forage, the gates of Paris were shut on them. After overcoming this
difficulty, they marched in a body to the Tuileries. They found that their
enemies had been already expelled thence by the Elect, as the fanatical party
designated themselves, who refused to admit any into the palace who did not
first abjure obedience to all except God, and his delegate on earth, their
chief. Such was the beginning of the strife, which at length proceeded so far,
that the three divisions, armed, met in the Place Vendome, each resolved to
subdue by force the resistance of its adversaries. They assembled, their
muskets were loaded, and even pointed at the breasts of their so called
enemies. One word had been sufficient; and there the last of mankind would have
burthened their souls with the crime of murder, and dipt their hands in each
other’s blood. A sense of shame, a recollection that not only their
cause, but the existence of the whole human race was at stake, entered the
breast of the leader of the more numerous party. He was aware, that if the
ranks were thinned, no other recruits could fill them up; that each man was as
a priceless gem in a kingly crown, which if destroyed, the earth’s deep
entrails could yield no paragon. He was a young man, and had been hurried on by
presumption, and the notion of his high rank and superiority to all other
pretenders; now he repented his work, he felt that all the blood about to be
shed would be on his head; with sudden impulse therefore he spurred his horse
between the bands, and, having fixed a white handkerchief on the point of his
uplifted sword, thus demanded parley; the opposite leaders obeyed the signal.
He spoke with warmth; he reminded them of the oath all the chiefs had taken to
submit to the Lord Protector; he declared their present meeting to be an act of
treason and mutiny; he allowed that he had been hurried away by passion, but
that a cooler moment had arrived; and he proposed that each party should send
deputies to the Earl of Windsor, inviting his interference and offering
submission to his decision. His offer was accepted so far, that each leader
consented to command a retreat, and moreover agreed, that after the approbation
of their several parties had been consulted, they should meet that night on
some neutral spot to ratify the truce. At the meeting of the chiefs, this plan
was finally concluded upon. The leader of the fanatics indeed refused to admit
the arbitration of Adrian; he sent ambassadors, rather than deputies, to assert
his claim, not plead his cause.


The truce was to continue until the first of February, when the bands were
again to assemble on the Place Vendome; it was of the utmost consequence
therefore that Adrian should arrive in Paris by that day, since an hair might
turn the scale, and peace, scared away by intestine broils, might only return
to watch by the silent dead. It was now the twenty-eighth of January; every
vessel stationed near Dover had been beaten to pieces and destroyed by the
furious storms I have commemorated. Our journey however would admit of no
delay. That very night, Adrian, and I, and twelve others, either friends or
attendants, put off from the English shore, in the boat that had brought over
the deputies. We all took our turn at the oar; and the immediate occasion of
our departure affording us abundant matter for conjecture and discourse,
prevented the feeling that we left our native country, depopulate England, for
the last time, to enter deeply into the minds of the greater part of our
number. It was a serene starlight night, and the dark line of the English coast
continued for some time visible at intervals, as we rose on the broad back of
the waves. I exerted myself with my long oar to give swift impulse to our
skiff; and, while the waters splashed with melancholy sound against its sides,
I looked with sad affection on this last glimpse of sea-girt England, and
strained my eyes not too soon to lose sight of the castellated cliff, which
rose to protect the land of heroism and beauty from the inroads of ocean, that,
turbulent as I had lately seen it, required such cyclopean walls for its
repulsion. A solitary sea-gull winged its flight over our heads, to seek its
nest in a cleft of the precipice. Yes, thou shalt revisit the land of thy
birth, I thought, as I looked invidiously on the airy voyager; but we shall,
never more! Tomb of Idris, farewell! Grave, in which my heart lies sepultured,
farewell for ever!


We were twelve hours at sea, and the heavy swell obliged us to exert all our
strength. At length, by mere dint of rowing, we reached the French coast. The
stars faded, and the grey morning cast a dim veil over the silver horns of the
waning moon—the sun rose broad and red from the sea, as we walked over
the sands to Calais. Our first care was to procure horses, and although wearied
by our night of watching and toil, some of our party immediately went in quest
of these in the wide fields of the unenclosed and now barren plain round
Calais. We divided ourselves, like seamen, into watches, and some reposed,
while others prepared the morning’s repast. Our foragers returned at noon
with only six horses—on these, Adrian and I, and four others, proceeded
on our journey towards the great city, which its inhabitants had fondly named
the capital of the civilized world. Our horses had become, through their long
holiday, almost wild, and we crossed the plain round Calais with impetuous
speed. From the height near Boulogne, I turned again to look on England; nature
had cast a misty pall over her, her cliff was hidden—there was spread the
watery barrier that divided us, never again to be crossed; she lay on the ocean
plain,


In the great pool a swan’s nest.


Ruined the nest, alas! the swans of Albion had passed away for ever—an
uninhabited rock in the wide Pacific, which had remained since the creation
uninhabited, unnamed, unmarked, would be of as much account in the
world’s future history, as desert England.


Our journey was impeded by a thousand obstacles. As our horses grew tired, we
had to seek for others; and hours were wasted, while we exhausted our artifices
to allure some of these enfranchised slaves of man to resume the yoke; or as we
went from stable to stable through the towns, hoping to find some who had not
forgotten the shelter of their native stalls. Our ill success in procuring
them, obliged us continually to leave some one of our companions behind; and on
the first of February, Adrian and I entered Paris, wholly unaccompanied. The
serene morning had dawned when we arrived at Saint Denis, and the sun was high,
when the clamour of voices, and the clash, as we feared, of weapons, guided us
to where our countrymen had assembled on the Place Vendome. We passed a knot of
Frenchmen, who were talking earnestly of the madness of the insular invaders,
and then coming by a sudden turn upon the Place, we saw the sun glitter on
drawn swords and fixed bayonets, while yells and clamours rent the air. It was
a scene of unaccustomed confusion in these days of depopulation. Roused by
fancied wrongs, and insulting scoffs, the opposite parties had rushed to attack
each other; while the elect, drawn up apart, seemed to wait an opportunity to
fall with better advantage on their foes, when they should have mutually
weakened each other. A merciful power interposed, and no blood was shed; for,
while the insane mob were in the very act of attack, the females, wives,
mothers and daughters, rushed between; they seized the bridles; they embraced
the knees of the horsemen, and hung on the necks, or enweaponed arms of their
enraged relatives; the shrill female scream was mingled with the manly shout,
and formed the wild clamour that welcomed us on our arrival.


Our voices could not be heard in the tumult; Adrian however was eminent for the
white charger he rode; spurring him, he dashed into the midst of the throng: he
was recognized, and a loud cry raised for England and the Protector. The late
adversaries, warmed to affection at the sight of him, joined in heedless
confusion, and surrounded him; the women kissed his hands, and the edges of his
garments; nay, his horse received tribute of their embraces; some wept their
welcome; he appeared an angel of peace descended among them; and the only
danger was, that his mortal nature would be demonstrated, by his suffocation
from the kindness of his friends. His voice was at length heard, and obeyed;
the crowd fell back; the chiefs alone rallied round him. I had seen Lord
Raymond ride through his lines; his look of victory, and majestic mien obtained
the respect and obedience of all: such was not the appearance or influence of
Adrian. His slight figure, his fervent look, his gesture, more of deprecation
than rule, were proofs that love, unmingled with fear, gave him dominion over
the hearts of a multitude, who knew that he never flinched from danger, nor was
actuated by other motives than care for the general welfare. No distinction was
now visible between the two parties, late ready to shed each other’s
blood, for, though neither would submit to the other, they both yielded ready
obedience to the Earl of Windsor.


One party however remained, cut off from the rest, which did not sympathize in
the joy exhibited on Adrian’s arrival, or imbibe the spirit of peace,
which fell like dew upon the softened hearts of their countrymen. At the head
of this assembly was a ponderous, dark-looking man, whose malign eye surveyed
with gloating delight the stern looks of his followers. They had hitherto been
inactive, but now, perceiving themselves to be forgotten in the universal
jubilee, they advanced with threatening gestures: our friends had, as it were
in wanton contention, attacked each other; they wanted but to be told that
their cause was one, for it to become so: their mutual anger had been a fire of
straw, compared to the slow-burning hatred they both entertained for these
seceders, who seized a portion of the world to come, there to entrench and
incastellate themselves, and to issue with fearful sally, and appalling
denunciations, on the mere common children of the earth. The first advance of
the little army of the elect reawakened their rage; they grasped their arms,
and waited but their leader’s signal to commence the attack, when the
clear tones of Adrian’s voice were heard, commanding them to fall back;
with confused murmur and hurried retreat, as the wave ebbs clamorously from the
sands it lately covered, our friends obeyed. Adrian rode singly into the space
between the opposing bands; he approached the hostile leader, as requesting him
to imitate his example, but his look was not obeyed, and the chief advanced,
followed by his whole troop. There were many women among them, who seemed more
eager and resolute than their male companions. They pressed round their leader,
as if to shield him, while they loudly bestowed on him every sacred
denomination and epithet of worship. Adrian met them half way; they halted:
“What,” he said, “do you seek? Do you require any thing of us
that we refuse to give, and that you are forced to acquire by arms and
warfare?”


His questions were answered by a general cry, in which the words election, sin,
and red right arm of God, could alone be heard.


Adrian looked expressly at their leader, saying, “Can you not silence
your followers? Mine, you perceive, obey me.”


The fellow answered by a scowl; and then, perhaps fearful that his people
should become auditors of the debate he expected to ensue, he commanded them to
fall back, and advanced by himself. “What, I again ask,” said
Adrian, “do you require of us?”


“Repentance,” replied the man, whose sinister brow gathered clouds
as he spoke. “Obedience to the will of the Most High, made manifest to
these his Elected People. Do we not all die through your sins, O generation of
unbelief, and have we not a right to demand of you repentance and
obedience?”


“And if we refuse them, what then?” his opponent inquired mildly.


“Beware,” cried the man, “God hears you, and will smite your
stony heart in his wrath; his poisoned arrows fly, his dogs of death are
unleashed! We will not perish unrevenged—and mighty will our avenger be,
when he descends in visible majesty, and scatters destruction among you.”


“My good fellow,” said Adrian, with quiet scorn, “I wish that
you were ignorant only, and I think it would be no difficult task to prove to
you, that you speak of what you do not understand. On the present occasion
however, it is enough for me to know that you seek nothing of us; and, heaven
is our witness, we seek nothing of you. I should be sorry to embitter by strife
the few days that we any of us may have here to live; when there,” he
pointed downwards, “we shall not be able to contend, while here we need
not. Go home, or stay; pray to your God in your own mode; your friends may do
the like. My orisons consist in peace and good will, in resignation and hope.
Farewell!”


He bowed slightly to the angry disputant who was about to reply; and, turning
his horse down Rue Saint Honore, called on his friends to follow him. He rode
slowly, to give time to all to join him at the Barrier, and then issued his
orders that those who yielded obedience to him, should rendezvous at
Versailles. In the meantime he remained within the walls of Paris, until he had
secured the safe retreat of all. In about a fortnight the remainder of the
emigrants arrived from England, and they all repaired to Versailles; apartments
were prepared for the family of the Protector in the Grand Trianon, and there,
after the excitement of these events, we reposed amidst the luxuries of the
departed Bourbons.


 [21]
Chorus in Œdipus Coloneus.

</div></body></text></TEI>