<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="26">
CHAPTER III.

Idris stirred and awoke; alas! she awoke to misery. She saw the signs of
disease on my countenance, and wondered how she could permit the long night to
pass without her having sought, not cure, that was impossible, but alleviation
to my sufferings. She called Adrian; my couch was quickly surrounded by friends
and assistants, and such medicines as were judged fitting were administered. It
was the peculiar and dreadful distinction of our visitation, that none who had
been attacked by the pestilence had recovered. The first symptom of the disease
was the death-warrant, which in no single instance had been followed by pardon
or reprieve. No gleam of hope therefore cheered my friends.


While fever producing torpor, heavy pains, sitting like lead on my limbs, and
making my breast heave, were upon me; I continued insensible to every thing but
pain, and at last even to that. I awoke on the fourth morning as from a
dreamless sleep. An irritating sense of thirst, and, when I strove to speak or
move, an entire dereliction of power, was all I felt.


For three days and nights Idris had not moved from my side. She administered to
all my wants, and never slept nor rested. She did not hope; and therefore she
neither endeavoured to read the physician’s countenance, nor to watch for
symptoms of recovery. All her thought was to attend on me to the last, and then
to lie down and die beside me. On the third night animation was suspended; to
the eye and touch of all I was dead. With earnest prayer, almost with force,
Adrian tried to draw Idris from me. He exhausted every adjuration, her
child’s welfare and his own. She shook her head, and wiped a stealing
tear from her sunk cheek, but would not yield; she entreated to be allowed to
watch me that one night only, with such affliction and meek earnestness, that
she gained her point, and sat silent and motionless, except when, stung by
intolerable remembrance, she kissed my closed eyes and pallid lips, and pressed
my stiffening hands to her beating heart.


At dead of night, when, though it was mid winter, the cock crowed at three
o’clock, as herald of the morning change, while hanging over me, and
mourning in silent, bitter thought for the loss of all of love towards her that
had been enshrined in my heart; her dishevelled hair hung over her face, and
the long tresses fell on the bed; she saw one ringlet in motion, and the
scattered hair slightly stirred, as by a breath. It is not so, she thought, for
he will never breathe more. Several times the same thing occurred, and she only
marked it by the same reflection; till the whole ringlet waved back, and she
thought she saw my breast heave. Her first emotion was deadly fear, cold dew
stood on her brow; my eyes half opened; and, re-assured, she would have
exclaimed, “He lives!” but the words were choked by a spasm, and
she fell with a groan on the floor.


Adrian was in the chamber. After long watching, he had unwillingly fallen into
a sleep. He started up, and beheld his sister senseless on the earth, weltering
in a stream of blood that gushed from her mouth. Encreasing signs of life in me
in some degree explained her state; the surprise, the burst of joy, the
revulsion of every sentiment, had been too much for her frame, worn by long
months of care, late shattered by every species of woe and toil. She was now in
far greater danger than I, the wheels and springs of my life, once again set in
motion, acquired elasticity from their short suspension. For a long time, no
one believed that I should indeed continue to live; during the reign of the
plague upon earth, not one person, attacked by the grim disease, had recovered.
My restoration was looked on as a deception; every moment it was expected that
the evil symptoms would recur with redoubled violence, until confirmed
convalescence, absence of all fever or pain, and encreasing strength, brought
slow conviction that I had recovered from the plague.


The restoration of Idris was more problematical. When I had been attacked by
illness, her cheeks were sunk, her form emaciated; but now, the vessel, which
had broken from the effects of extreme agitation, did not entirely heal, but
was as a channel that drop by drop drew from her the ruddy stream that vivified
her heart. Her hollow eyes and worn countenance had a ghastly appearance; her
cheek-bones, her open fair brow, the projection of the mouth, stood fearfully
prominent; you might tell each bone in the thin anatomy of her frame. Her hand
hung powerless; each joint lay bare, so that the light penetrated through and
through. It was strange that life could exist in what was wasted and worn into
a very type of death.


To take her from these heart-breaking scenes, to lead her to forget the
world’s desolation in the variety of objects presented by travelling, and
to nurse her failing strength in the mild climate towards which we had resolved
to journey, was my last hope for her preservation. The preparations for our
departure, which had been suspended during my illness, were renewed. I did not
revive to doubtful convalescence; health spent her treasures upon me; as the
tree in spring may feel from its wrinkled limbs the fresh green break forth,
and the living sap rise and circulate, so did the renewed vigour of my frame,
the cheerful current of my blood, the new-born elasticity of my limbs,
influence my mind to cheerful endurance and pleasurable thoughts. My body, late
the heavy weight that bound me to the tomb, was exuberant with health; mere
common exercises were insufficient for my reviving strength; methought I could
emulate the speed of the race-horse, discern through the air objects at a
blinding distance, hear the operations of nature in her mute abodes; my senses
had become so refined and susceptible after my recovery from mortal disease.


Hope, among my other blessings, was not denied to me; and I did fondly trust
that my unwearied attentions would restore my adored girl. I was therefore
eager to forward our preparations. According to the plan first laid down, we
were to have quitted London on the twenty-fifth of November; and, in pursuance
of this scheme, two-thirds of our people—the people— all
that remained of England, had gone forward, and had already been some weeks in
Paris. First my illness, and subsequently that of Idris, had detained Adrian
with his division, which consisted of three hundred persons, so that we now
departed on the first of January, 2098. It was my wish to keep Idris as distant
as possible from the hurry and clamour of the crowd, and to hide from her those
appearances that would remind her most forcibly of our real situation. We
separated ourselves to a great degree from Adrian, who was obliged to give his
whole time to public business. The Countess of Windsor travelled with her son.
Clara, Evelyn, and a female who acted as our attendant, were the only persons
with whom we had contact. We occupied a commodious carriage, our servant
officiated as coachman. A party of about twenty persons preceded us at a small
distance. They had it in charge to prepare our halting places and our nightly
abode. They had been selected for this service out of a great number that
offered, on account of the superior sagacity of the man who had been appointed
their leader.


Immediately on our departure, I was delighted to find a change in Idris, which
I fondly hoped prognosticated the happiest results. All the cheerfulness and
gentle gaiety natural to her revived. She was weak, and this alteration was
rather displayed in looks and voice than in acts; but it was permanent and
real. My recovery from the plague and confirmed health instilled into her a
firm belief that I was now secure from this dread enemy. She told me that she
was sure she should recover. That she had a presentiment, that the tide of
calamity which deluged our unhappy race had now turned. That the remnant would
be preserved, and among them the dear objects of her tender affection; and that
in some selected spot we should wear out our lives together in pleasant
society. “Do not let my state of feebleness deceive you,” she said;
“I feel that I am better; there is a quick life within me, and a spirit
of anticipation that assures me, that I shall continue long to make a part of
this world. I shall throw off this degrading weakness of body, which infects
even my mind with debility, and I shall enter again on the performance of my
duties. I was sorry to leave Windsor: but now I am weaned from this local
attachment; I am content to remove to a mild climate, which will complete my
recovery. Trust me, dearest, I shall neither leave you, nor my brother, nor
these dear children; my firm determination to remain with you to the last, and
to continue to contribute to your happiness and welfare, would keep me alive,
even if grim death were nearer at hand than he really is.”


I was only half re-assured by these expressions; I could not believe that the
over-quick flow of her blood was a sign of health, or that her burning cheeks
denoted convalescence. But I had no fears of an immediate catastrophe; nay, I
persuaded myself that she would ultimately recover. And thus cheerfulness
reigned in our little society. Idris conversed with animation on a thousand
topics. Her chief desire was to lead our thoughts from melancholy reflections;
so she drew charming pictures of a tranquil solitude, of a beauteous retreat,
of the simple manners of our little tribe, and of the patriarchal brotherhood
of love, which would survive the ruins of the populous nations which had lately
existed. We shut out from our thoughts the present, and withdrew our eyes from
the dreary landscape we traversed. Winter reigned in all its gloom. The
leafless trees lay without motion against the dun sky; the forms of frost,
mimicking the foliage of summer, strewed the ground; the paths were overgrown;
the unploughed cornfields were patched with grass and weeds; the sheep
congregated at the threshold of the cottage, the horned ox thrust his head from
the window. The wind was bleak, and frequent sleet or snow-storms, added to the
melancholy appearance wintry nature assumed.


We arrived at Rochester, and an accident caused us to be detained there a day.
During that time, a circumstance occurred that changed our plans, and which,
alas! in its result changed the eternal course of events, turning me from the
pleasant new sprung hope I enjoyed, to an obscure and gloomy desert. But I must
give some little explanation before I proceed with the final cause of our
temporary alteration of plan, and refer again to those times when man walked
the earth fearless, before Plague had become Queen of the World.


There resided a family in the neighbourhood of Windsor, of very humble
pretensions, but which had been an object of interest to us on account of one
of the persons of whom it was composed. The family of the Claytons had known
better days; but, after a series of reverses, the father died a bankrupt, and
the mother heartbroken, and a confirmed invalid, retired with her five children
to a little cottage between Eton and Salt Hill. The eldest of these children,
who was thirteen years old, seemed at once from the influence of adversity, to
acquire the sagacity and principle belonging to a more mature age. Her mother
grew worse and worse in health, but Lucy attended on her, and was as a tender
parent to her younger brothers and sisters, and in the meantime shewed herself
so good-humoured, social, and benevolent, that she was beloved as well as
honoured, in her little neighbourhood.


Lucy was besides extremely pretty; so when she grew to be sixteen, it was to be
supposed, notwithstanding her poverty, that she should have admirers. One of
these was the son of a country-curate; he was a generous, frank-hearted youth,
with an ardent love of knowledge, and no mean acquirements. Though Lucy was
untaught, her mother’s conversation and manners gave her a taste for
refinements superior to her present situation. She loved the youth even without
knowing it, except that in any difficulty she naturally turned to him for aid,
and awoke with a lighter heart every Sunday, because she knew that she would be
met and accompanied by him in her evening walk with her sisters. She had
another admirer, one of the head-waiters at the inn at Salt Hill. He also was
not without pretensions to urbane superiority, such as he learnt from
gentlemen’s servants and waiting-maids, who initiating him in all the
slang of high life below stairs, rendered his arrogant temper ten times more
intrusive. Lucy did not disclaim him—she was incapable of that feeling;
but she was sorry when she saw him approach, and quietly resisted all his
endeavours to establish an intimacy. The fellow soon discovered that his rival
was preferred to him; and this changed what was at first a chance admiration
into a passion, whose main springs were envy, and a base desire to deprive his
competitor of the advantage he enjoyed over himself.


Poor Lucy’s sad story was but a common one. Her lover’s father
died; and he was left destitute. He accepted the offer of a gentleman to go to
India with him, feeling secure that he should soon acquire an independence, and
return to claim the hand of his beloved. He became involved in the war carried
on there, was taken prisoner, and years elapsed before tidings of his existence
were received in his native land. In the meantime disastrous poverty came on
Lucy. Her little cottage, which stood looking from its trellice, covered with
woodbine and jessamine, was burnt down; and the whole of their little property
was included in the destruction. Whither betake them? By what exertion of
industry could Lucy procure them another abode? Her mother nearly bed-rid,
could not survive any extreme of famine-struck poverty. At this time her other
admirer stept forward, and renewed his offer of marriage. He had saved money,
and was going to set up a little inn at Datchet. There was nothing alluring to
Lucy in this offer, except the home it secured to her mother; and she felt more
sure of this, since she was struck by the apparent generosity which occasioned
the present offer. She accepted it; thus sacrificing herself for the comfort
and welfare of her parent.


It was some years after her marriage that we became acquainted with her. The
accident of a storm caused us to take refuge in the inn, where we witnessed the
brutal and quarrelsome behaviour of her husband, and her patient endurance. Her
lot was not a fortunate one. Her first lover had returned with the hope of
making her his own, and met her by accident, for the first time, as the
mistress of his country inn, and the wife of another. He withdrew despairingly
to foreign parts; nothing went well with him; at last he enlisted, and came
back again wounded and sick, and yet Lucy was debarred from nursing him. Her
husband’s brutal disposition was aggravated by his yielding to the many
temptations held out by his situation, and the consequent disarrangement of his
affairs. Fortunately she had no children; but her heart was bound up in her
brothers and sisters, and these his avarice and ill temper soon drove from the
house; they were dispersed about the country, earning their livelihood with
toil and care. He even shewed an inclination to get rid of her mother—but
Lucy was firm here—she had sacrificed herself for her; she lived for her
—she would not part with her—if the mother went, she would also go
beg bread for her, die with her, but never desert her. The presence of Lucy was
too necessary in keeping up the order of the house, and in preventing the whole
establishment from going to wreck, for him to permit her to leave him. He
yielded the point; but in all accesses of anger, or in his drunken fits, he
recurred to the old topic, and stung poor Lucy’s heart by opprobrious
epithets bestowed on her parent.


A passion however, if it be wholly pure, entire, and reciprocal, brings with it
its own solace. Lucy was truly, and from the depth of heart, devoted to her
mother; the sole end she proposed to herself in life, was the comfort and
preservation of this parent. Though she grieved for the result, yet she did not
repent of her marriage, even when her lover returned to bestow competence on
her. Three years had intervened, and how, in their pennyless state, could her
mother have existed during this time? This excellent woman was worthy of her
child’s devotion. A perfect confidence and friendship existed between
them; besides, she was by no means illiterate; and Lucy, whose mind had been in
some degree cultivated by her former lover, now found in her the only person
who could understand and appreciate her. Thus, though suffering, she was by no
means desolate, and when, during fine summer days, she led her mother into the
flowery and shady lanes near their abode, a gleam of unmixed joy enlightened
her countenance; she saw that her parent was happy, and she knew that this
happiness was of her sole creating.


Meanwhile her husband’s affairs grew more and more involved; ruin was
near at hand, and she was about to lose the fruit of all her labours, when
pestilence came to change the aspect of the world. Her husband reaped benefit
from the universal misery; but, as the disaster encreased, the spirit of
lawlessness seized him; he deserted his home to revel in the luxuries promised
him in London, and found there a grave. Her former lover had been one of the
first victims of the disease. But Lucy continued to live for and in her mother.
Her courage only failed when she dreaded peril for her parent, or feared that
death might prevent her from performing those duties to which she was
unalterably devoted.


When we had quitted Windsor for London, as the previous step to our final
emigration, we visited Lucy, and arranged with her the plan of her own and her
mother’s removal. Lucy was sorry at the necessity which forced her to
quit her native lanes and village, and to drag an infirm parent from her
comforts at home, to the homeless waste of depopulate earth; but she was too
well disciplined by adversity, and of too sweet a temper, to indulge in
repinings at what was inevitable.


Subsequent circumstances, my illness and that of Idris, drove her from our
remembrance; and we called her to mind at last, only to conclude that she made
one of the few who came from Windsor to join the emigrants, and that she was
already in Paris. When we arrived at Rochester therefore, we were surprised to
receive, by a man just come from Slough, a letter from this exemplary sufferer.
His account was, that, journeying from his home, and passing through Datchet,
he was surprised to see smoke issue from the chimney of the inn, and supposing
that he should find comrades for his journey assembled there, he knocked and
was admitted. There was no one in the house but Lucy, and her mother; the
latter had been deprived of the use of her limbs by an attack of rheumatism,
and so, one by one, all the remaining inhabitants of the country set forward,
leaving them alone. Lucy intreated the man to stay with her; in a week or two
her mother would be better, and they would then set out; but they must perish,
if they were left thus helpless and forlorn. The man said, that his wife and
children were already among the emigrants, and it was therefore, according to
his notion, impossible for him to remain. Lucy, as a last resource, gave him a
letter for Idris, to be delivered to her wherever he should meet us. This
commission at least he fulfilled, and Idris received with emotion the following
letter:—


“HONOURED LADY,


“I am sure that you will remember and pity me, and I dare hope that you
will assist me; what other hope have I? Pardon my manner of writing, I am so
bewildered. A month ago my dear mother was deprived of the use of her limbs.
She is already better, and in another month would I am sure be able to travel,
in the way you were so kind as to say you would arrange for us. But now
everybody is gone—everybody—as they went away, each said, that
perhaps my mother would be better, before we were quite deserted. But three
days ago I went to Samuel Woods, who, on account of his new-born child,
remained to the last; and there being a large family of them, I thought I could
persuade them to wait a little longer for us; but I found the house deserted. I
have not seen a soul since, till this good man came. —What will become of
us? My mother does not know our state; she is so ill, that I have hidden it
from her.


“Will you not send some one to us? I am sure we must perish miserably as
we are. If I were to try to move my mother now, she would die on the road; and
if, when she gets better, I were able, I cannot guess how, to find out the
roads, and get on so many many miles to the sea, you would all be in France,
and the great ocean would be between us, which is so terrible even to sailors.
What would it be to me, a woman, who never saw it? We should be imprisoned by
it in this country, all, all alone, with no help; better die where we are. I
can hardly write—I cannot stop my tears—it is not for myself; I
could put my trust in God; and let the worst come, I think I could bear it, if
I were alone. But my mother, my sick, my dear, dear mother, who never, since I
was born, spoke a harsh word to me, who has been patient in many sufferings;
pity her, dear Lady, she must die a miserable death if you do not pity her.
People speak carelessly of her, because she is old and infirm, as if we must
not all, if we are spared, become so; and then, when the young are old
themselves, they will think that they ought to be taken care of. It is very
silly of me to write in this way to you; but, when I hear her trying not to
groan, and see her look smiling on me to comfort me, when I know she is in
pain; and when I think that she does not know the worst, but she soon must; and
then she will not complain; but I shall sit guessing at all that she is
dwelling upon, of famine and misery—I feel as if my heart must break, and
I do not know what I say or do; my mother—mother for whom I have borne
much, God preserve you from this fate! Preserve her, Lady, and He will bless
you; and I, poor miserable creature as I am, will thank you and pray for you
while I live.


“Your unhappy and dutiful servant,
LUCY MARTIN.”
“Dec. 30th, 2097.


This letter deeply affected Idris, and she instantly proposed, that we should
return to Datchet, to assist Lucy and her mother. I said that I would without
delay set out for that place, but entreated her to join her brother, and there
await my return with the children. But Idris was in high spirits, and full of
hope. She declared that she could not consent even to a temporary separation
from me, but that there was no need of this, the motion of the carriage did her
good, and the distance was too trifling to be considered. We could dispatch
messengers to Adrian, to inform him of our deviation from the original plan.
She spoke with vivacity, and drew a picture after her own dear heart, of the
pleasure we should bestow upon Lucy, and declared, if I went, she must
accompany me, and that she should very much dislike to entrust the charge of
rescuing them to others, who might fulfil it with coldness or inhumanity.
Lucy’s life had been one act of devotion and virtue; let her now reap the
small reward of finding her excellence appreciated, and her necessity assisted,
by those whom she respected and honoured.


These, and many other arguments, were urged with gentle pertinacity, and the
ardour of a wish to do all the good in her power, by her whose simple
expression of a desire and slightest request had ever been a law with me. I, of
course, consented, the moment that I saw that she had set her heart upon this
step. We sent half our attendant troop on to Adrian; and with the other half
our carriage took a retrograde course back to Windsor.


I wonder now how I could be so blind and senseless, as thus to risk the safety
of Idris; for, if I had eyes, surely I could see the sure, though deceitful,
advance of death in her burning cheek and encreasing weakness. But she said she
was better; and I believed her. Extinction could not be near a being, whose
vivacity and intelligence hourly encreased, and whose frame was endowed with an
intense, and I fondly thought, a strong and permanent spirit of life. Who,
after a great disaster, has not looked back with wonder at his inconceivable
obtuseness of understanding, that could not perceive the many minute threads
with which fate weaves the inextricable net of our destinies, until he is
inmeshed completely in it?


The cross roads which we now entered upon, were even in a worse state than the
long neglected high-ways; and the inconvenience seemed to menace the perishing
frame of Idris with destruction. Passing through Dartford, we arrived at
Hampton on the second day. Even in this short interval my beloved companion
grew sensibly worse in health, though her spirits were still light, and she
cheered my growing anxiety with gay sallies; sometimes the thought pierced my
brain—Is she dying?—as I saw her fair fleshless hand rest on mine,
or observed the feebleness with which she performed the accustomed acts of
life. I drove away the idea, as if it had been suggested by insanity; but it
occurred again and again, only to be dispelled by the continued liveliness of
her manner.


About mid-day, after quitting Hampton, our carriage broke down: the shock
caused Idris to faint, but on her reviving no other ill consequence ensued; our
party of attendants had as usual gone on before us, and our coachman went in
search of another vehicle, our former one being rendered by this accident unfit
for service. The only place near us was a poor village, in which he found a
kind of caravan, able to hold four people, but it was clumsy and ill hung;
besides this he found a very excellent cabriolet: our plan was soon arranged; I
would drive Idris in the latter; while the children were conveyed by the
servant in the former. But these arrangements cost time; we had agreed to
proceed that night to Windsor, and thither our purveyors had gone: we should
find considerable difficulty in getting accommodation, before we reached this
place; after all, the distance was only ten miles; my horse was a good one; I
would go forward at a good pace with Idris, leaving the children to follow at a
rate more consonant to the uses of their cumberous machine.


Evening closed in quickly, far more quickly than I was prepared to expect. At
the going down of the sun it began to snow heavily. I attempted in vain to
defend my beloved companion from the storm; the wind drove the snow in our
faces; and it lay so high on the ground, that we made but small way; while the
night was so dark, that but for the white covering on the ground we should not
have been able to see a yard before us. We had left our accompanying caravan
far behind us; and now I perceived that the storm had made me unconsciously
deviate from my intended route. I had gone some miles out of my way. My
knowledge of the country enabled me to regain the right road; but, instead of
going, as at first agreed upon, by a cross road through Stanwell to Datchet, I
was obliged to take the way of Egham and Bishopgate. It was certain therefore
that I should not be rejoined by the other vehicle, that I should not meet a
single fellow-creature till we arrived at Windsor.


The back of our carriage was drawn up, and I hung a pelisse before it, thus to
curtain the beloved sufferer from the pelting sleet. She leaned on my shoulder,
growing every moment more languid and feeble; at first she replied to my words
of cheer with affectionate thanks; but by degrees she sunk into silence; her
head lay heavily upon me; I only knew that she lived by her irregular breathing
and frequent sighs. For a moment I resolved to stop, and, opposing the back of
the cabriolet to the force of the tempest, to expect morning as well as I
might. But the wind was bleak and piercing, while the occasional shudderings of
my poor Idris, and the intense cold I felt myself, demonstrated that this would
be a dangerous experiment. At length methought she slept—fatal sleep,
induced by frost: at this moment I saw the heavy outline of a cottage traced on
the dark horizon close to us: “Dearest love,” I said,
“support yourself but one moment, and we shall have shelter; let us stop
here, that I may open the door of this blessed dwelling.”


As I spoke, my heart was transported, and my senses swam with excessive delight
and thankfulness; I placed the head of Idris against the carriage, and, leaping
out, scrambled through the snow to the cottage, whose door was open. I had
apparatus about me for procuring light, and that shewed me a comfortable room,
with a pile of wood in one corner, and no appearance of disorder, except that,
the door having been left partly open, the snow, drifting in, had blocked up
the threshold. I returned to the carriage, and the sudden change from light to
darkness at first blinded me. When I recovered my sight—eternal God of
this lawless world! O supreme Death! I will not disturb thy silent reign, or
mar my tale with fruitless exclamations of horror—I saw Idris, who had
fallen from the seat to the bottom of the carriage; her head, its long hair
pendent, with one arm, hung over the side.—Struck by a spasm of horror, I
lifted her up; her heart was pulseless, her faded lips unfanned by the
slightest breath.


I carried her into the cottage; I placed her on the bed. Lighting a fire, I
chafed her stiffening limbs; for two long hours I sought to restore departed
life; and, when hope was as dead as my beloved, I closed with trembling hands
her glazed eyes. I did not doubt what I should now do. In the confusion
attendant on my illness, the task of interring our darling Alfred had devolved
on his grandmother, the Ex-Queen, and she, true to her ruling passion, had
caused him to be carried to Windsor, and buried in the family vault, in St.
George’s Chapel. I must proceed to Windsor, to calm the anxiety of Clara,
who would wait anxiously for us—yet I would fain spare her the
heart-breaking spectacle of Idris, brought in by me lifeless from the journey.
So first I would place my beloved beside her child in the vault, and then seek
the poor children who would be expecting me.


I lighted the lamps of my carriage; I wrapt her in furs, and placed her along
the seat; then taking the reins, made the horses go forward. We proceeded
through the snow, which lay in masses impeding the way, while the descending
flakes, driving against me with redoubled fury, blinded me. The pain occasioned
by the angry elements, and the cold iron of the shafts of frost which buffetted
me, and entered my aching flesh, were a relief to me; blunting my mental
suffering. The horses staggered on, and the reins hung loosely in my hands. I
often thought I would lay my head close to the sweet, cold face of my lost
angel, and thus resign myself to conquering torpor. Yet I must not leave her a
prey to the fowls of the air; but, in pursuance of my determination place her
in the tomb of her forefathers, where a merciful God might permit me to rest
also.


The road we passed through Egham was familiar to me; but the wind and snow
caused the horses to drag their load slowly and heavily. Suddenly the wind
veered from south-west to west, and then again to north-west. As Sampson with
tug and strain stirred from their bases the columns that supported the
Philistine temple, so did the gale shake the dense vapours propped on the
horizon, while the massy dome of clouds fell to the south, disclosing through
the scattered web the clear empyrean, and the little stars, which were set at
an immeasurable distance in the crystalline fields, showered their small rays
on the glittering snow. Even the horses were cheered, and moved on with
renovated strength. We entered the forest at Bishopgate, and at the end of the
Long Walk I saw the Castle, “the proud Keep of Windsor, rising in the
majesty of proportion, girt with the double belt of its kindred and coeval
towers.” I looked with reverence on a structure, ancient almost as the
rock on which it stood, abode of kings, theme of admiration for the wise. With
greater reverence and, tearful affection I beheld it as the asylum of the long
lease of love I had enjoyed there with the perishable, unmatchable treasure of
dust, which now lay cold beside me. Now indeed, I could have yielded to all the
softness of my nature, and wept; and, womanlike, have uttered bitter plaints;
while the familiar trees, the herds of living deer, the sward oft prest by her
fairy-feet, one by one with sad association presented themselves. The white
gate at the end of the Long Walk was wide open, and I rode up the empty town
through the first gate of the feudal tower; and now St. George’s Chapel,
with its blackened fretted sides, was right before me. I halted at its door,
which was open; I entered, and placed my lighted lamp on the altar; then I
returned, and with tender caution I bore Idris up the aisle into the chancel,
and laid her softly down on the carpet which covered the step leading to the
communion table. The banners of the knights of the garter, and their half drawn
swords, were hung in vain emblazonry above the stalls. The banner of her family
hung there, still surmounted by its regal crown. Farewell to the glory and
heraldry of England!—I turned from such vanity with a slight feeling of
wonder, at how mankind could have ever been interested in such things. I bent
over the lifeless corpse of my beloved; and, while looking on her uncovered
face, the features already contracted by the rigidity of death, I felt as if
all the visible universe had grown as soulless, inane, and comfortless as the
clay-cold image beneath me. I felt for a moment the intolerable sense of
struggle with, and detestation for, the laws which govern the world; till the
calm still visible on the face of my dead love recalled me to a more soothing
tone of mind, and I proceeded to fulfil the last office that could now be paid
her. For her I could not lament, so much I envied her enjoyment of “the
sad immunities of the grave.”


The vault had been lately opened to place our Alfred therein. The ceremony
customary in these latter days had been cursorily performed, and the pavement
of the chapel, which was its entrance, having been removed, had not been
replaced. I descended the steps, and walked through the long passage to the
large vault which contained the kindred dust of my Idris. I distinguished the
small coffin of my babe. With hasty, trembling hands I constructed a bier
beside it, spreading it with the furs and Indian shawls, which had wrapt Idris
in her journey thither. I lighted the glimmering lamp, which flickered in this
damp abode of the dead; then I bore my lost one to her last bed, decently
composing her limbs, and covering them with a mantle, veiling all except her
face, which remained lovely and placid. She appeared to rest like one
over-wearied, her beauteous eyes steeped in sweet slumber. Yet, so it was
not—she was dead! How intensely I then longed to lie down beside her, to
gaze till death should gather me to the same repose.


But death does not come at the bidding of the miserable. I had lately recovered
from mortal illness, and my blood had never flowed with such an even current,
nor had my limbs ever been so instinct with quick life, as now. I felt that my
death must be voluntary. Yet what more natural than famine, as I watched in
this chamber of mortality, placed in a world of the dead, beside the lost hope
of my life? Meanwhile as I looked on her, the features, which bore a sisterly
resemblance to Adrian, brought my thoughts back again to the living, to this
dear friend, to Clara, and to Evelyn, who were probably now in Windsor, waiting
anxiously for our arrival.


Methought I heard a noise, a step in the far chapel, which was re-echoed by its
vaulted roof, and borne to me through the hollow passages. Had Clara seen my
carriage pass up the town, and did she seek me here? I must save her at least
from the horrible scene the vault presented. I sprung up the steps, and then
saw a female figure, bent with age, and clad in long mourning robes, advance
through the dusky chapel, supported by a slender cane, yet tottering even with
this support. She heard me, and looked up; the lamp I held illuminated my
figure, and the moon-beams, struggling through the painted glass, fell upon her
face, wrinkled and gaunt, yet with a piercing eye and commanding brow—I
recognized the Countess of Windsor. With a hollow voice she asked, “Where
is the princess?”


I pointed to the torn up pavement: she walked to the spot, and looked down into
the palpable darkness; for the vault was too distant for the rays of the small
lamp I had left there to be discernible.


“Your light,” she said. I gave it her; and she regarded the now
visible, but precipitous steps, as if calculating her capacity to descend.
Instinctively I made a silent offer of my assistance. She motioned me away with
a look of scorn, saying in an harsh voice, as she pointed downwards,
“There at least I may have her undisturbed.”


She walked deliberately down, while I, overcome, miserable beyond words, or
tears, or groans, threw myself on the pavement near—the stiffening form
of Idris was before me, the death-struck countenance hushed in eternal repose
beneath. That was to me the end of all! The day before, I had figured to my
self various adventures, and communion with my friends in after time—now
I had leapt the interval, and reached the utmost edge and bourne of life. Thus
wrapt in gloom, enclosed, walled up, vaulted over by the omnipotent present, I
was startled by the sound of feet on the steps of the tomb, and I remembered
her whom I had utterly forgotten, my angry visitant; her tall form slowly rose
upwards from the vault, a living statue, instinct with hate, and human,
passionate strife: she seemed to me as having reached the pavement of the
aisle; she stood motionless, seeking with her eyes alone, some desired
object—till, perceiving me close to her, she placed her wrinkled hand on
my arm, exclaiming with tremulous accents, “Lionel Verney, my son!”
This name, applied at such a moment by my angel’s mother, instilled into
me more respect than I had ever before felt for this disdainful lady. I bowed
my head, and kissed her shrivelled hand, and, remarking that she trembled
violently, supported her to the end of the chancel, where she sat on the steps
that led to the regal stall. She suffered herself to be led, and still holding
my hand, she leaned her head back against the stall, while the moon beams,
tinged with various colours by the painted glass, fell on her glistening eyes;
aware of her weakness, again calling to mind her long cherished dignity, she
dashed the tears away; yet they fell fast, as she said, for excuse, “She
is so beautiful and placid, even in death. No harsh feeling ever clouded her
serene brow; how did I treat her? wounding her gentle heart with savage
coldness; I had no compassion on her in past years, does she forgive me now?
Little, little does it boot to talk of repentance and forgiveness to the dead,
had I during her life once consulted her gentle wishes, and curbed my rugged
nature to do her pleasure, I should not feel thus.”


Idris and her mother were unlike in person. The dark hair, deep-set black eyes,
and prominent features of the Ex-Queen were in entire contrast to the golden
tresses, the full blue orbs, and the soft lines and contour of her
daughter’s countenance. Yet, in latter days, illness had taken from my
poor girl the full outline of her face, and reduced it to the inflexible shape
of the bone beneath. In the form of her brow, in her oval chin, there was to be
found a resemblance to her mother; nay in some moods, their gestures were not
unlike; nor, having lived so long together, was this wonderful.


There is a magic power in resemblance. When one we love dies, we hope to see
them in another state, and half expect that the agency of mind will inform its
new garb in imitation of its decayed earthly vesture. But these are ideas of
the mind only. We know that the instrument is shivered, the sensible image lies
in miserable fragments, dissolved to dusty nothingness; a look, a gesture, or a
fashioning of the limbs similar to the dead in a living person, touches a
thrilling chord, whose sacred harmony is felt in the heart’s dearest
recess. Strangely moved, prostrate before this spectral image, and enslaved by
the force of blood manifested in likeness of look and movement, I remained
trembling in the presence of the harsh, proud, and till now unloved mother of
Idris.


Poor, mistaken woman! in her tenderest mood before, she had cherished the idea,
that a word, a look of reconciliation from her, would be received with joy, and
repay long years of severity. Now that the time was gone for the exercise of
such power, she fell at once upon the thorny truth of things, and felt that
neither smile nor caress could penetrate to the unconscious state, or influence
the happiness of her who lay in the vault beneath. This conviction, together
with the remembrance of soft replies to bitter speeches, of gentle looks
repaying angry glances; the perception of the falsehood, paltryness and
futility of her cherished dreams of birth and power; the overpowering
knowledge, that love and life were the true emperors of our mortal state; all,
as a tide, rose, and filled her soul with stormy and bewildering confusion. It
fell to my lot, to come as the influential power, to allay the fierce tossing
of these tumultuous waves. I spoke to her; I led her to reflect how happy Idris
had really been, and how her virtues and numerous excellencies had found scope
and estimation in her past career. I praised her, the idol of my heart’s
dear worship, the admired type of feminine perfection. With ardent and
overflowing eloquence, I relieved my heart from its burthen, and awoke to the
sense of a new pleasure in life, as I poured forth the funeral eulogy. Then I
referred to Adrian, her loved brother, and to her surviving child. I declared,
which I had before almost forgotten, what my duties were with regard to these
valued portions of herself, and bade the melancholy repentant mother reflect,
how she could best expiate unkindness towards the dead, by redoubled love of
the survivors. Consoling her, my own sorrows were assuaged; my sincerity won
her entire conviction.


She turned to me. The hard, inflexible, persecuting woman, turned with a mild
expression of face, and said, “If our beloved angel sees us now, it will
delight her to find that I do you even tardy justice. You were worthy of her;
and from my heart I am glad that you won her away from me. Pardon, my son, the
many wrongs I have done you; forget my bitter words and unkind
treatment—take me, and govern me as you will.”


I seized this docile moment to propose our departure from the church.
“First,” she said, “let us replace the pavement above the
vault.”


We drew near to it; “Shall we look on her again?” I asked.


“I cannot,” she replied, “and, I pray you, neither do you. We
need not torture ourselves by gazing on the soulless body, while her living
spirit is buried quick in our hearts, and her surpassing loveliness is so
deeply carved there, that sleeping or waking she must ever be present to
us.”


For a few moments, we bent in solemn silence over the open vault. I consecrated
my future life, to the embalming of her dear memory; I vowed to serve her
brother and her child till death. The convulsive sob of my companion made me
break off my internal orisons. I next dragged the stones over the entrance of
the tomb, and closed the gulph that contained the life of my life. Then,
supporting my decrepid fellow-mourner, we slowly left the chapel. I felt, as I
stepped into the open air, as if I had quitted an happy nest of repose, for a
dreary wilderness, a tortuous path, a bitter, joyless, hopeless pilgrimage.

</div></body></text></TEI>