<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="32">
CHAPTER IX.

Now—soft awhile—have I arrived so near the end? Yes! it is all over
now—a step or two over those new made graves, and the wearisome way is
done. Can I accomplish my task? Can I streak my paper with words capacious of
the grand conclusion? Arise, black Melancholy! quit thy Cimmerian solitude!
Bring with thee murky fogs from hell, which may drink up the day; bring blight
and pestiferous exhalations, which, entering the hollow caverns and breathing
places of earth, may fill her stony veins with corruption, so that not only
herbage may no longer flourish, the trees may rot, and the rivers run with
gall—but the everlasting mountains be decomposed, and the mighty deep
putrify, and the genial atmosphere which clips the globe, lose all powers of
generation and sustenance. Do this, sad visaged power, while I write, while
eyes read these pages.


And who will read them? Beware, tender offspring of the re-born world—
beware, fair being, with human heart, yet untamed by care, and human brow, yet
unploughed by time—beware, lest the cheerful current of thy blood be
checked, thy golden locks turn grey, thy sweet dimpling smiles be changed to
fixed, harsh wrinkles! Let not day look on these lines, lest garish day waste,
turn pale, and die. Seek a cypress grove, whose moaning boughs will be harmony
befitting; seek some cave, deep embowered in earth’s dark entrails, where
no light will penetrate, save that which struggles, red and flickering, through
a single fissure, staining thy page with grimmest livery of death.


There is a painful confusion in my brain, which refuses to delineate distinctly
succeeding events. Sometimes the irradiation of my friend’s gentle smile
comes before me; and methinks its light spans and fills eternity—then,
again, I feel the gasping throes—


We quitted Como, and in compliance with Adrian’s earnest desire, we took
Venice in our way to Rome. There was something to the English peculiarly
attractive in the idea of this wave-encircled, island-enthroned city. Adrian
had never seen it. We went down the Po and the Brenta in a boat; and, the days
proving intolerably hot, we rested in the bordering palaces during the day,
travelling through the night, when darkness made the bordering banks
indistinct, and our solitude less remarkable; when the wandering moon lit the
waves that divided before our prow, and the night-wind filled our sails, and
the murmuring stream, waving trees, and swelling canvass, accorded in
harmonious strain. Clara, long overcome by excessive grief, had to a great
degree cast aside her timid, cold reserve, and received our attentions with
grateful tenderness. While Adrian with poetic fervour discoursed of the
glorious nations of the dead, of the beauteous earth and the fate of man, she
crept near him, drinking in his speech with silent pleasure. We banished from
our talk, and as much as possible from our thoughts, the knowledge of our
desolation. And it would be incredible to an inhabitant of cities, to one among
a busy throng, to what extent we succeeded. It was as a man confined in a
dungeon, whose small and grated rift at first renders the doubtful light more
sensibly obscure, till, the visual orb having drunk in the beam, and adapted
itself to its scantiness, he finds that clear noon inhabits his cell. So we, a
simple triad on empty earth, were multiplied to each other, till we became all
in all. We stood like trees, whose roots are loosened by the wind, which
support one another, leaning and clinging with encreased fervour while the
wintry storms howl. Thus we floated down the widening stream of the Po,
sleeping when the cicale sang, awake with the stars. We entered the narrower
banks of the Brenta, and arrived at the shore of the Laguna at sunrise on the
sixth of September. The bright orb slowly rose from behind its cupolas and
towers, and shed its penetrating light upon the glassy waters. Wrecks of
gondolas, and some few uninjured ones, were strewed on the beach at Fusina. We
embarked in one of these for the widowed daughter of ocean, who, abandoned and
fallen, sat forlorn on her propping isles, looking towards the far mountains of
Greece. We rowed lightly over the Laguna, and entered Canale Grande. The tide
ebbed sullenly from out the broken portals and violated halls of Venice: sea
weed and sea monsters were left on the blackened marble, while the salt ooze
defaced the matchless works of art that adorned their walls, and the sea gull
flew out from the shattered window. In the midst of this appalling ruin of the
monuments of man’s power, nature asserted her ascendancy, and shone more
beauteous from the contrast. The radiant waters hardly trembled, while the
rippling waves made many sided mirrors to the sun; the blue immensity, seen
beyond Lido, stretched far, unspecked by boat, so tranquil, so lovely, that it
seemed to invite us to quit the land strewn with ruins, and to seek refuge from
sorrow and fear on its placid extent.


We saw the ruins of this hapless city from the height of the tower of San
Marco, immediately under us, and turned with sickening hearts to the sea,
which, though it be a grave, rears no monument, discloses no ruin. Evening had
come apace. The sun set in calm majesty behind the misty summits of the
Apennines, and its golden and roseate hues painted the mountains of the
opposite shore. “That land,” said Adrian, “tinged with the
last glories of the day, is Greece.” Greece! The sound had a responsive
chord in the bosom of Clara. She vehemently reminded us that we had promised to
take her once again to Greece, to the tomb of her parents. Why go to Rome? what
should we do at Rome? We might take one of the many vessels to be found here,
embark in it, and steer right for Albania.


I objected the dangers of ocean, and the distance of the mountains we saw, from
Athens; a distance which, from the savage uncultivation of the country, was
almost impassable. Adrian, who was delighted with Clara’s proposal,
obviated these objections. The season was favourable; the north-west that blew
would take us transversely across the gulph; and then we might find, in some
abandoned port, a light Greek caique, adapted for such navigation, and run down
the coast of the Morea, and, passing over the Isthmus of Corinth, without much
land-travelling or fatigue, find ourselves at Athens. This appeared to me wild
talk; but the sea, glowing with a thousand purple hues, looked so brilliant and
safe; my beloved companions were so earnest, so determined, that, when Adrian
said, “Well, though it is not exactly what you wish, yet consent, to
please me”—I could no longer refuse. That evening we selected a
vessel, whose size just seemed fitted for our enterprize; we bent the sails and
put the rigging in order, and reposing that night in one of the city’s
thousand palaces, agreed to embark at sunrise the following morning.


When winds that move not its calm surface, sweep
The azure sea, I love the land no more;
The smiles of the serene and tranquil deep
Tempt my unquiet mind—


Thus said Adrian, quoting a translation of Moschus’s poem, as in the
clear morning light, we rowed over the Laguna, past Lido, into the open
sea—I would have added in continuation,


        But when the roar
Of ocean’s gray abyss resounds, and foam
Gathers upon the sea, and vast waves burst—


But my friends declared that such verses were evil augury; so in cheerful mood
we left the shallow waters, and, when out at sea, unfurled our sails to catch
the favourable breeze. The laughing morning air filled them, while sun-light
bathed earth, sky and ocean—the placid waves divided to receive our keel,
and playfully kissed the dark sides of our little skiff, murmuring a welcome;
as land receded, still the blue expanse, most waveless, twin sister to the
azure empyrean, afforded smooth conduct to our bark. As the air and waters were
tranquil and balmy, so were our minds steeped in quiet. In comparison with the
unstained deep, funereal earth appeared a grave, its high rocks and stately
mountains were but monuments, its trees the plumes of a herse, the brooks and
rivers brackish with tears for departed man. Farewell to desolate towns
—to fields with their savage intermixture of corn and weeds—to ever
multiplying relics of our lost species. Ocean, we commit ourselves to thee
—even as the patriarch of old floated above the drowned world, let us be
saved, as thus we betake ourselves to thy perennial flood.


Adrian sat at the helm; I attended to the rigging, the breeze right aft filled
our swelling canvas, and we ran before it over the untroubled deep. The wind
died away at noon; its idle breath just permitted us to hold our course. As
lazy, fair-weather sailors, careless of the coming hour, we talked gaily of our
coasting voyage, of our arrival at Athens. We would make our home of one of the
Cyclades, and there in myrtle-groves, amidst perpetual spring, fanned by the
wholesome sea-breezes—we would live long years in beatific
union—Was there such a thing as death in the world?—


The sun passed its zenith, and lingered down the stainless floor of heaven.
Lying in the boat, my face turned up to the sky, I thought I saw on its blue
white, marbled streaks, so slight, so immaterial, that now I said— They
are there—and now, It is a mere imagination. A sudden fear stung me while
I gazed; and, starting up, and running to the prow,—as I stood, my hair
was gently lifted on my brow—a dark line of ripples appeared to the east,
gaining rapidly on us—my breathless remark to Adrian, was followed by the
flapping of the canvas, as the adverse wind struck it, and our boat
lurched—swift as speech, the web of the storm thickened over head, the
sun went down red, the dark sea was strewed with foam, and our skiff rose and
fell in its encreasing furrows.


Behold us now in our frail tenement, hemmed in by hungry, roaring waves,
buffeted by winds. In the inky east two vast clouds, sailing contrary ways,
met; the lightning leapt forth, and the hoarse thunder muttered. Again in the
south, the clouds replied, and the forked stream of fire running along the
black sky, shewed us the appalling piles of clouds, now met and obliterated by
the heaving waves. Great God! And we alone—we three—
alone—alone—sole dwellers on the sea and on the earth, we three
must perish! The vast universe, its myriad worlds, and the plains of boundless
earth which we had left—the extent of shoreless sea
around—contracted to my view—they and all that they contained,
shrunk up to one point, even to our tossing bark, freighted with glorious
humanity.


A convulsion of despair crossed the love-beaming face of Adrian, while with set
teeth he murmured, “Yet they shall be saved!” Clara, visited by an
human pang, pale and trembling, crept near him—he looked on her with an
encouraging smile—“Do you fear, sweet girl? O, do not fear, we
shall soon be on shore!”


The darkness prevented me from seeing the changes of her countenance; but her
voice was clear and sweet, as she replied, “Why should I fear? neither
sea nor storm can harm us, if mighty destiny or the ruler of destiny does not
permit. And then the stinging fear of surviving either of you, is not
here—one death will clasp us undivided.”


Meanwhile we took in all our sails, save a gib; and, as soon as we might
without danger, changed our course, running with the wind for the Italian
shore. Dark night mixed everything; we hardly discerned the white crests of the
murderous surges, except when lightning made brief noon, and drank the
darkness, shewing us our danger, and restoring us to double night. We were all
silent, except when Adrian, as steersman, made an encouraging observation. Our
little shell obeyed the rudder miraculously well, and ran along on the top of
the waves, as if she had been an offspring of the sea, and the angry mother
sheltered her endangered child.


I sat at the prow, watching our course; when suddenly I heard the waters break
with redoubled fury. We were certainly near the shore—at the same time I
cried, “About there!” and a broad lightning filling the concave,
shewed us for one moment the level beach a-head, disclosing even the sands, and
stunted, ooze-sprinkled beds of reeds, that grew at high water mark. Again it
was dark, and we drew in our breath with such content as one may, who, while
fragments of volcano-hurled rock darken the air, sees a vast mass ploughing the
ground immediately at his feet. What to do we knew not —the breakers
here, there, everywhere, encompassed us—they roared, and dashed, and
flung their hated spray in our faces. With considerable difficulty and danger
we succeeded at length in altering our course, and stretched out from shore. I
urged my companions to prepare for the wreck of our little skiff, and to bind
themselves to some oar or spar which might suffice to float them. I was myself
an excellent swimmer—the very sight of the sea was wont to raise in me
such sensations, as a huntsman experiences, when he hears a pack of hounds in
full cry; I loved to feel the waves wrap me and strive to overpower me; while
I, lord of myself, moved this way or that, in spite of their angry buffetings.
Adrian also could swim—but the weakness of his frame prevented him from
feeling pleasure in the exercise, or acquiring any great expertness. But what
power could the strongest swimmer oppose to the overpowering violence of ocean
in its fury? My efforts to prepare my companions were rendered nearly futile
—for the roaring breakers prevented our hearing one another speak, and
the waves, that broke continually over our boat, obliged me to exert all my
strength in lading the water out, as fast as it came in. The while darkness,
palpable and rayless, hemmed us round, dissipated only by the lightning;
sometimes we beheld thunderbolts, fiery red, fall into the sea, and at
intervals vast spouts stooped from the clouds, churning the wild ocean, which
rose to meet them; while the fierce gale bore the rack onwards, and they were
lost in the chaotic mingling of sky and sea. Our gunwales had been torn away,
our single sail had been rent to ribbands, and borne down the stream of the
wind. We had cut away our mast, and lightened the boat of all she
contained—Clara attempted to assist me in heaving the water from the
hold, and, as she turned her eyes to look on the lightning, I could discern by
that momentary gleam, that resignation had conquered every fear. We have a
power given us in any worst extremity, which props the else feeble mind of man,
and enables us to endure the most savage tortures with a stillness of soul
which in hours of happiness we could not have imagined. A calm, more dreadful
in truth than the tempest, allayed the wild beatings of my heart—a calm
like that of the gamester, the suicide, and the murderer, when the last die is
on the point of being cast—while the poisoned cup is at the
lips,—as the death-blow is about to be given.


Hours passed thus—hours which might write old age on the face of
beardless youth, and grizzle the silky hair of infancy—-hours, while the
chaotic uproar continued, while each dread gust transcended in fury the one
before, and our skiff hung on the breaking wave, and then rushed into the
valley below, and trembled and spun between the watery precipices that seemed
most to meet above her. For a moment the gale paused, and ocean sank to
comparative silence—it was a breathless interval; the wind which, as a
practised leaper, had gathered itself up before it sprung, now with terrific
roar rushed over the sea, and the waves struck our stern. Adrian exclaimed that
the rudder was gone;—“We are lost,” cried Clara, “Save
yourselves—O save yourselves!” The lightning shewed me the poor
girl half buried in the water at the bottom of the boat; as she was sinking in
it Adrian caught her up, and sustained her in his arms. We were without a
rudder—we rushed prow foremost into the vast billows piled up
a-head— they broke over and filled the tiny skiff; one scream I
heard—one cry that we were gone, I uttered; I found myself in the waters;
darkness was around. When the light of the tempest flashed, I saw the keel of
our upset boat close to me—I clung to this, grasping it with clenched
hand and nails, while I endeavoured during each flash to discover any
appearance of my companions. I thought I saw Adrian at no great distance from
me, clinging to an oar; I sprung from my hold, and with energy beyond my human
strength, I dashed aside the waters as I strove to lay hold of him. As that
hope failed, instinctive love of life animated me, and feelings of contention,
as if a hostile will combated with mine. I breasted the surges, and flung them
from me, as I would the opposing front and sharpened claws of a lion about to
enfang my bosom. When I had been beaten down by one wave, I rose on another,
while I felt bitter pride curl my lip.


Ever since the storm had carried us near the shore, we had never attained any
great distance from it. With every flash I saw the bordering coast; yet the
progress I made was small, while each wave, as it receded, carried me back into
ocean’s far abysses. At one moment I felt my foot touch the sand, and
then again I was in deep water; my arms began to lose their power of motion; my
breath failed me under the influence of the strangling waters— a thousand
wild and delirious thoughts crossed me: as well as I can now recall them, my
chief feeling was, how sweet it would be to lay my head on the quiet earth,
where the surges would no longer strike my weakened frame, nor the sound of
waters ring in my ears—to attain this repose, not to save my life, I made
a last effort—the shelving shore suddenly presented a footing for me. I
rose, and was again thrown down by the breakers—a point of rock to which
I was enabled to cling, gave me a moment’s respite; and then, taking
advantage of the ebbing of the waves, I ran forwards— gained the dry
sands, and fell senseless on the oozy reeds that sprinkled them.


I must have lain long deprived of life; for when first, with a sickening
feeling, I unclosed my eyes, the light of morning met them. Great change had
taken place meanwhile: grey dawn dappled the flying clouds, which sped onwards,
leaving visible at intervals vast lakes of pure ether. A fountain of light
arose in an encreasing stream from the east, behind the waves of the Adriatic,
changing the grey to a roseate hue, and then flooding sky and sea with aerial
gold.


A kind of stupor followed my fainting; my senses were alive, but memory was
extinct. The blessed respite was short—a snake lurked near me to sting me
into life—on the first retrospective emotion I would have started up, but
my limbs refused to obey me; my knees trembled, the muscles had lost all power.
I still believed that I might find one of my beloved companions cast like me,
half alive, on the beach; and I strove in every way to restore my frame to the
use of its animal functions. I wrung the brine from my hair; and the rays of
the risen sun soon visited me with genial warmth. With the restoration of my
bodily powers, my mind became in some degree aware of the universe of misery,
henceforth to be its dwelling. I ran to the water’s edge, calling on the
beloved names. Ocean drank in, and absorbed my feeble voice, replying with
pitiless roar. I climbed a near tree: the level sands bounded by a pine forest,
and the sea clipped round by the horizon, was all that I could discern. In vain
I extended my researches along the beach; the mast we had thrown overboard,
with tangled cordage, and remnants of a sail, was the sole relic land received
of our wreck. Sometimes I stood still, and wrung my hands. I accused earth and
sky —the universal machine and the Almighty power that misdirected it.
Again I threw myself on the sands, and then the sighing wind, mimicking a human
cry, roused me to bitter, fallacious hope. Assuredly if any little bark or
smallest canoe had been near, I should have sought the savage plains of ocean,
found the dear remains of my lost ones, and clinging round them, have shared
their grave.


The day passed thus; each moment contained eternity; although when hour after
hour had gone by, I wondered at the quick flight of time. Yet even now I had
not drunk the bitter potion to the dregs; I was not yet persuaded of my loss; I
did not yet feel in every pulsation, in every nerve, in every thought, that I
remained alone of my race,—that I was the LAST MAN.


The day had clouded over, and a drizzling rain set in at sunset. Even the
eternal skies weep, I thought; is there any shame then, that mortal man should
spend himself in tears? I remembered the ancient fables, in which human beings
are described as dissolving away through weeping into ever-gushing fountains.
Ah! that so it were; and then my destiny would be in some sort akin to the
watery death of Adrian and Clara. Oh! grief is fantastic; it weaves a web on
which to trace the history of its woe from every form and change around; it
incorporates itself with all living nature; it finds sustenance in every
object; as light, it fills all things, and, like light, it gives its own
colours to all.


I had wandered in my search to some distance from the spot on which I had been
cast, and came to one of those watch-towers, which at stated distances line the
Italian shore. I was glad of shelter, glad to find a work of human hands, after
I had gazed so long on nature’s drear barrenness; so I entered, and
ascended the rough winding staircase into the guard-room. So far was fate kind,
that no harrowing vestige remained of its former inhabitants; a few planks laid
across two iron tressels, and strewed with the dried leaves of Indian corn, was
the bed presented to me; and an open chest, containing some half mouldered
biscuit, awakened an appetite, which perhaps existed before, but of which,
until now, I was not aware. Thirst also, violent and parching, the result of
the sea-water I had drank, and of the exhaustion of my frame, tormented me.
Kind nature had gifted the supply of these wants with pleasurable sensations,
so that I—even I!—was refreshed and calmed, as I ate of this sorry
fare, and drank a little of the sour wine which half filled a flask left in
this abandoned dwelling. Then I stretched myself on the bed, not to be
disdained by the victim of shipwreck. The earthy smell of the dried leaves was
balm to my sense after the hateful odour of sea-weed. I forgot my state of
loneliness. I neither looked backward nor forward; my senses were hushed to
repose; I fell asleep and dreamed of all dear inland scenes, of hay-makers, of
the shepherd’s whistle to his dog, when he demanded his help to drive the
flock to fold; of sights and sounds peculiar to my boyhood’s mountain
life, which I had long forgotten.


I awoke in a painful agony—for I fancied that ocean, breaking its bounds,
carried away the fixed continent and deep rooted mountains, together with the
streams I loved, the woods, and the flocks—it raged around, with that
continued and dreadful roar which had accompanied the last wreck of surviving
humanity. As my waking sense returned, the bare walls of the guard room closed
round me, and the rain pattered against the single window. How dreadful it is,
to emerge from the oblivion of slumber, and to receive as a good morrow the
mute wailing of one’s own hapless heart —to return from the land of
deceptive dreams, to the heavy knowledge of unchanged disaster!—Thus was
it with me, now, and for ever! The sting of other griefs might be blunted by
time; and even mine yielded sometimes during the day, to the pleasure inspired
by the imagination or the senses; but I never look first upon the morning-light
but with my fingers pressed tight on my bursting heart, and my soul deluged
with the interminable flood of hopeless misery. Now I awoke for the first time
in the dead world—I awoke alone—and the dull dirge of the sea,
heard even amidst the rain, recalled me to the reflection of the wretch I had
become. The sound came like a reproach, a scoff—like the sting of remorse
in the soul—I gasped—the veins and muscles of my throat swelled,
suffocating me. I put my fingers to my ears, I buried my head in the leaves of
my couch, I would have dived to the centre to lose hearing of that hideous
moan.


But another task must be mine—again I visited the detested beach—
again I vainly looked far and wide—again I raised my unanswered cry,
lifting up the only voice that could ever again force the mute air to syllable
the human thought.


What a pitiable, forlorn, disconsolate being I was! My very aspect and garb
told the tale of my despair. My hair was matted and wild—my limbs soiled
with salt ooze; while at sea, I had thrown off those of my garments that
encumbered me, and the rain drenched the thin summer-clothing I had
retained—my feet were bare, and the stunted reeds and broken shells made
them bleed—the while, I hurried to and fro, now looking earnestly on some
distant rock which, islanded in the sands, bore for a moment a deceptive
appearance—now with flashing eyes reproaching the murderous ocean for its
unutterable cruelty.


For a moment I compared myself to that monarch of the waste—Robinson
Crusoe. We had been both thrown companionless—he on the shore of a
desolate island: I on that of a desolate world. I was rich in the so called
goods of life. If I turned my steps from the near barren scene, and entered any
of the earth’s million cities, I should find their wealth stored up for
my accommodation—clothes, food, books, and a choice of dwelling beyond
the command of the princes of former times—every climate was subject to
my selection, while he was obliged to toil in the acquirement of every
necessary, and was the inhabitant of a tropical island, against whose heats and
storms he could obtain small shelter.—Viewing the question thus, who
would not have preferred the Sybarite enjoyments I could command, the
philosophic leisure, and ample intellectual resources, to his life of labour
and peril? Yet he was far happier than I: for he could hope, nor hope in
vain—the destined vessel at last arrived, to bear him to countrymen and
kindred, where the events of his solitude became a fire-side tale. To none
could I ever relate the story of my adversity; no hope had I. He knew that,
beyond the ocean which begirt his lonely island, thousands lived whom the sun
enlightened when it shone also on him: beneath the meridian sun and visiting
moon, I alone bore human features; I alone could give articulation to thought;
and, when I slept, both day and night were unbeheld of any. He had fled from
his fellows, and was transported with terror at the print of a human foot. I
would have knelt down and worshipped the same. The wild and cruel Caribbee, the
merciless Cannibal—or worse than these, the uncouth, brute, and
remorseless veteran in the vices of civilization, would have been to me a
beloved companion, a treasure dearly prized—his nature would be kin to
mine; his form cast in the same mould; human blood would flow in his veins; a
human sympathy must link us for ever. It cannot be that I shall never behold a
fellow being more!—never! —never!—not in the course of
years!—Shall I wake, and speak to none, pass the interminable hours, my
soul, islanded in the world, a solitary point, surrounded by vacuum? Will day
follow day endlessly thus? —No! no! a God rules the
world—providence has not exchanged its golden sceptre for an
aspic’s sting. Away! let me fly from the ocean-grave, let me depart from
this barren nook, paled in, as it is, from access by its own desolateness; let
me tread once again the paved towns; step over the threshold of man’s
dwellings, and most certainly I shall find this thought a horrible
vision—a maddening, but evanescent dream.


I entered Ravenna, (the town nearest to the spot whereon I had been cast),
before the second sun had set on the empty world; I saw many living creatures;
oxen, and horses, and dogs, but there was no man among them; I entered a
cottage, it was vacant; I ascended the marble stairs of a palace, the bats and
the owls were nestled in the tapestry; I stepped softly, not to awaken the
sleeping town: I rebuked a dog, that by yelping disturbed the sacred stillness;
I would not believe that all was as it seemed—The world was not dead, but
I was mad; I was deprived of sight, hearing, and sense of touch; I was
labouring under the force of a spell, which permitted me to behold all sights
of earth, except its human inhabitants; they were pursuing their ordinary
labours. Every house had its inmate; but I could not perceive them. If I could
have deluded myself into a belief of this kind, I should have been far more
satisfied. But my brain, tenacious of its reason, refused to lend itself to
such imaginations—and though I endeavoured to play the antic to myself, I
knew that I, the offspring of man, during long years one among many—now
remained sole survivor of my species.


The sun sank behind the western hills; I had fasted since the preceding
evening, but, though faint and weary, I loathed food, nor ceased, while yet a
ray of light remained, to pace the lonely streets. Night came on, and sent
every living creature but me to the bosom of its mate. It was my solace, to
blunt my mental agony by personal hardship—of the thousand beds around, I
would not seek the luxury of one; I lay down on the pavement,—a cold
marble step served me for a pillow—midnight came; and then, though not
before, did my wearied lids shut out the sight of the twinkling stars, and
their reflex on the pavement near. Thus I passed the second night of my
desolation.

</div></body></text></TEI>