<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="15">
CHAPTER II.

On my arrival, I found that an order had already gone forth for the army to
proceed immediately towards Constantinople; and the troops which had suffered
least in the battle were already on their way. The town was full of tumult. The
wound, and consequent inability of Argyropylo, caused Raymond to be the first
in command. He rode through the town, visiting the wounded, and giving such
orders as were necessary for the siege he meditated. Early in the morning the
whole army was in motion. In the hurry I could hardly find an opportunity to
bestow the last offices on Evadne. Attended only by my servant, I dug a deep
grave for her at the foot of the tree, and without disturbing her warrior
shroud, I placed her in it, heaping stones upon the grave. The dazzling sun and
glare of daylight, deprived the scene of solemnity; from Evadne’s low
tomb, I joined Raymond and his staff, now on their way to the Golden City.


Constantinople was invested, trenches dug, and advances made. The whole Greek
fleet blockaded it by sea; on land from the river Kyat Kbanah, near the Sweet
Waters, to the Tower of Marmora, on the shores of the Propontis, along the
whole line of the ancient walls, the trenches of the siege were drawn. We
already possessed Pera; the Golden Horn itself, the city, bastioned by the sea,
and the ivy-mantled walls of the Greek emperors was all of Europe that the
Mahometans could call theirs. Our army looked on her as certain prey. They
counted the garrison; it was impossible that it should be relieved; each sally
was a victory; for, even when the Turks were triumphant, the loss of men they
sustained was an irreparable injury. I rode one morning with Raymond to the
lofty mound, not far from the Top Kapou, (Cannon-gate), on which Mahmoud
planted his standard, and first saw the city. Still the same lofty domes and
minarets towered above the verdurous walls, where Constantine had died, and the
Turk had entered the city. The plain around was interspersed with cemeteries,
Turk, Greek, and Armenian, with their growth of cypress trees; and other woods
of more cheerful aspect, diversified the scene. Among them the Greek army was
encamped, and their squadrons moved to and fro—now in regular march, now
in swift career.


Raymond’s eyes were fixed on the city. “I have counted the hours of
her life,” said he; “one month, and she falls. Remain with me till
then; wait till you see the cross on St. Sophia; and then return to your
peaceful glades.”


“You then,” I asked, “still remain in Greece?”


“Assuredly,” replied Raymond. “Yet Lionel, when I say this,
believe me I look back with regret to our tranquil life at Windsor. I am but
half a soldier; I love the renown, but not the trade of war. Before the battle
of Rodosto I was full of hope and spirit; to conquer there, and afterwards to
take Constantinople, was the hope, the bourne, the fulfilment of my ambition.
This enthusiasm is now spent, I know not why; I seem to myself to be entering a
darksome gulph; the ardent spirit of the army is irksome to me, the rapture of
triumph null.”


He paused, and was lost in thought. His serious mien recalled, by some
association, the half-forgotten Evadne to my mind, and I seized this
opportunity to make enquiries from him concerning her strange lot. I asked him,
if he had ever seen among the troops any one resembling her; if since he had
returned to Greece he had heard of her?


He started at her name,—he looked uneasily on me. “Even so,”
he cried, “I knew you would speak of her. Long, long I had forgotten her.
Since our encampment here, she daily, hourly visits my thoughts. When I am
addressed, her name is the sound I expect: in every communication, I imagine
that she will form a part. At length you have broken the spell; tell me what
you know of her.”


I related my meeting with her; the story of her death was told and re-told.
With painful earnestness he questioned me concerning her prophecies with regard
to him. I treated them as the ravings of a maniac. “No, no,” he
said, “do not deceive yourself,—me you cannot. She has said nothing
but what I knew before—though this is confirmation. Fire, the sword, and
plague! They may all be found in yonder city; on my head alone may they
fall!”


From this day Raymond’s melancholy increased. He secluded himself as much
as the duties of his station permitted. When in company, sadness would in spite
of every effort steal over his features, and he sat absent and mute among the
busy crowd that thronged about him. Perdita rejoined him, and before her he
forced himself to appear cheerful, for she, even as a mirror, changed as he
changed, and if he were silent and anxious, she solicitously inquired
concerning, and endeavoured to remove the cause of his seriousness. She resided
at the palace of Sweet Waters, a summer seraglio of the Sultan; the beauty of
the surrounding scenery, undefiled by war, and the freshness of the river, made
this spot doubly delightful. Raymond felt no relief, received no pleasure from
any show of heaven or earth. He often left Perdita, to wander in the grounds
alone; or in a light shallop he floated idly on the pure waters, musing deeply.
Sometimes I joined him; at such times his countenance was invariably solemn,
his air dejected. He seemed relieved on seeing me, and would talk with some
degree of interest on the affairs of the day. There was evidently something
behind all this; yet, when he appeared about to speak of that which was nearest
his heart, he would abruptly turn away, and with a sigh endeavour to deliver
the painful idea to the winds.


It had often occurred, that, when, as I said, Raymond quitted Perdita’s
drawing-room, Clara came up to me, and gently drawing me aside, said,
“Papa is gone; shall we go to him? I dare say he will be glad to see
you.” And, as accident permitted, I complied with or refused her request.
One evening a numerous assembly of Greek chieftains were gathered together in
the palace. The intriguing Palli, the accomplished Karazza, the warlike
Ypsilanti, were among the principal. They talked of the events of the day; the
skirmish at noon; the diminished numbers of the Infidels; their defeat and
flight: they contemplated, after a short interval of time, the capture of the
Golden City. They endeavoured to picture forth what would then happen, and
spoke in lofty terms of the prosperity of Greece, when Constantinople should
become its capital. The conversation then reverted to Asiatic intelligence, and
the ravages the plague made in its chief cities; conjectures were hazarded as
to the progress that disease might have made in the besieged city.


Raymond had joined in the former part of the discussion. In lively terms he
demonstrated the extremities to which Constantinople was reduced; the wasted
and haggard, though ferocious appearance of the troops; famine and pestilence
was at work for them, he observed, and the infidels would soon be obliged to
take refuge in their only hope—submission. Suddenly in the midst of his
harangue he broke off, as if stung by some painful thought; he rose uneasily,
and I perceived him at length quit the hall, and through the long corridor seek
the open air. He did not return; and soon Clara crept round to me, making the
accustomed invitation. I consented to her request, and taking her little hand,
followed Raymond. We found him just about to embark in his boat, and he readily
agreed to receive us as companions. After the heats of the day, the cooling
land-breeze ruffled the river, and filled our little sail. The city looked dark
to the south, while numerous lights along the near shores, and the beautiful
aspect of the banks reposing in placid night, the waters keenly reflecting the
heavenly lights, gave to this beauteous river a dower of loveliness that might
have characterized a retreat in Paradise. Our single boatman attended to the
sail; Raymond steered; Clara sat at his feet, clasping his knees with her arms,
and laying her head on them. Raymond began the conversation somewhat abruptly.


“This, my friend, is probably the last time we shall have an opportunity
of conversing freely; my plans are now in full operation, and my time will
become more and more occupied. Besides, I wish at once to tell you my wishes
and expectations, and then never again to revert to so painful a subject.
First, I must thank you, Lionel, for having remained here at my request. Vanity
first prompted me to ask you: vanity, I call it; yet even in this I see the
hand of fate—your presence will soon be necessary; you will become the
last resource of Perdita, her protector and consoler. You will take her back to
Windsor.”—


“Not without you,” I said. “You do not mean to separate
again?”


“Do not deceive yourself,” replied Raymond, “the separation
at hand is one over which I have no control; most near at hand is it; the days
are already counted. May I trust you? For many days I have longed to disclose
the mysterious presentiments that weigh on me, although I fear that you will
ridicule them. Yet do not, my gentle friend; for, all childish and unwise as
they are, they have become a part of me, and I dare not expect to shake them
off.


“Yet how can I expect you to sympathize with me? You are of this world; I
am not. You hold forth your hand; it is even as a part of yourself; and you do
not yet divide the feeling of identity from the mortal form that shapes forth
Lionel. How then can you understand me? Earth is to me a tomb, the firmament a
vault, shrouding mere corruption. Time is no more, for I have stepped within
the threshold of eternity; each man I meet appears a corse, which will soon be
deserted of its animating spark, on the eve of decay and corruption.


Cada piedra un piramide levanta,
y cada flor costruye un monumento,
cada edificio es un sepulcro altivo,
cada soldado un esqueleto vivo.”[3]


His accent was mournful,—he sighed deeply. “A few months
ago,” he continued, “I was thought to be dying; but life was strong
within me. My affections were human; hope and love were the day-stars of my
life. Now— they dream that the brows of the conqueror of the infidel
faith are about to be encircled by triumphant laurel; they talk of honourable
reward, of title, power, and wealth—all I ask of Greece is a grave. Let
them raise a mound above my lifeless body, which may stand even when the dome
of St. Sophia has fallen.


“Wherefore do I feel thus? At Rodosto I was full of hope; but when first
I saw Constantinople, that feeling, with every other joyful one, departed. The
last words of Evadne were the seal upon the warrant of my death. Yet I do not
pretend to account for my mood by any particular event. All I can say is, that
it is so. The plague I am told is in Constantinople, perhaps I have imbibed its
effluvia—perhaps disease is the real cause of my prognostications. It
matters little why or wherefore I am affected, no power can avert the stroke,
and the shadow of Fate’s uplifted hand already darkens me.


“To you, Lionel, I entrust your sister and her child. Never mention to
her the fatal name of Evadne. She would doubly sorrow over the strange link
that enchains me to her, making my spirit obey her dying voice, following her,
as it is about to do, to the unknown country.”


I listened to him with wonder; but that his sad demeanour and solemn utterance
assured me of the truth and intensity of his feelings, I should with light
derision have attempted to dissipate his fears. Whatever I was about to reply,
was interrupted by the powerful emotions of Clara. Raymond had spoken,
thoughtless of her presence, and she, poor child, heard with terror and faith
the prophecy of his death. Her father was moved by her violent grief; he took
her in his arms and soothed her, but his very soothings were solemn and
fearful. “Weep not, sweet child,” said he, “the coming death
of one you have hardly known. I may die, but in death I can never forget or
desert my own Clara. In after sorrow or joy, believe that you father’s
spirit is near, to save or sympathize with you. Be proud of me, and cherish
your infant remembrance of me. Thus, sweetest, I shall not appear to die. One
thing you must promise,—not to speak to any one but your uncle, of the
conversation you have just overheard. When I am gone, you will console your
mother, and tell her that death was only bitter because it divided me from her;
that my last thoughts will be spent on her. But while I live, promise not to
betray me; promise, my child.”


With faltering accents Clara promised, while she still clung to her father in a
transport of sorrow. Soon we returned to shore, and I endeavoured to obviate
the impression made on the child’s mind, by treating Raymond’s
fears lightly. We heard no more of them; for, as he had said, the siege, now
drawing to a conclusion, became paramount in interest, engaging all his time
and attention.


The empire of the Mahometans in Europe was at its close. The Greek fleet
blockading every port of Stamboul, prevented the arrival of succour from Asia;
all egress on the side towards land had become impracticable, except to such
desperate sallies, as reduced the numbers of the enemy without making any
impression on our lines. The garrison was now so much diminished, that it was
evident that the city could easily have been carried by storm; but both
humanity and policy dictated a slower mode of proceeding. We could hardly doubt
that, if pursued to the utmost, its palaces, its temples and store of wealth
would be destroyed in the fury of contending triumph and defeat. Already the
defenceless citizens had suffered through the barbarity of the Janisaries; and,
in time of storm, tumult and massacre, beauty, infancy and decrepitude, would
have alike been sacrificed to the brutal ferocity of the soldiers. Famine and
blockade were certain means of conquest; and on these we founded our hopes of
victory.


Each day the soldiers of the garrison assaulted our advanced posts, and impeded
the accomplishment of our works. Fire-boats were launched from the various
ports, while our troops sometimes recoiled from the devoted courage of men who
did not seek to live, but to sell their lives dearly. These contests were
aggravated by the season: they took place during summer, when the southern
Asiatic wind came laden with intolerable heat, when the streams were dried up
in their shallow beds, and the vast basin of the sea appeared to glow under the
unmitigated rays of the solsticial sun. Nor did night refresh the earth. Dew
was denied; herbage and flowers there were none; the very trees drooped; and
summer assumed the blighted appearance of winter, as it went forth in silence
and flame to abridge the means of sustenance to man. In vain did the eye strive
to find the wreck of some northern cloud in the stainless empyrean, which might
bring hope of change and moisture to the oppressive and windless atmosphere.
All was serene, burning, annihilating. We the besiegers were in the comparison
little affected by these evils. The woods around afforded us shade,—the
river secured to us a constant supply of water; nay, detachments were employed
in furnishing the army with ice, which had been laid up on Haemus, and Athos,
and the mountains of Macedonia, while cooling fruits and wholesome food
renovated the strength of the labourers, and made us bear with less impatience
the weight of the unrefreshing air. But in the city things wore a different
face. The sun’s rays were refracted from the pavement and
buildings—the stoppage of the public fountains—the bad quality of
the food, and scarcity even of that, produced a state of suffering, which was
aggravated by the scourge of disease; while the garrison arrogated every
superfluity to themselves, adding by waste and riot to the necessary evils of
the time. Still they would not capitulate.


Suddenly the system of warfare was changed. We experienced no more assaults;
and by night and day we continued our labours unimpeded. Stranger still, when
the troops advanced near the city, the walls were vacant, and no cannon was
pointed against the intruders. When these circumstances were reported to
Raymond, he caused minute observations to be made as to what was doing within
the walls, and when his scouts returned, reporting only the continued silence
and desolation of the city, he commanded the army to be drawn out before the
gates. No one appeared on the walls; the very portals, though locked and
barred, seemed unguarded; above, the many domes and glittering crescents
pierced heaven; while the old walls, survivors of ages, with ivy-crowned tower
and weed-tangled buttress, stood as rocks in an uninhabited waste. From within
the city neither shout nor cry, nor aught except the casual howling of a dog,
broke the noon-day stillness. Even our soldiers were awed to silence; the music
paused; the clang of arms was hushed. Each man asked his fellow in whispers,
the meaning of this sudden peace; while Raymond from an height endeavoured, by
means of glasses, to discover and observe the stratagem of the enemy. No form
could be discerned on the terraces of the houses; in the higher parts of the
town no moving shadow bespoke the presence of any living being: the very trees
waved not, and mocked the stability of architecture with like immovability.


The tramp of horses, distinctly heard in the silence, was at length discerned.
It was a troop sent by Karazza, the Admiral; they bore dispatches to the Lord
General. The contents of these papers were important. The night before, the
watch, on board one of the smaller vessels anchored near the seraglio wall, was
roused by a slight splashing as of muffled oars; the alarm was given: twelve
small boats, each containing three Janizaries, were descried endeavouring to
make their way through the fleet to the opposite shore of Scutari. When they
found themselves discovered they discharged their muskets, and some came to the
front to cover the others, whose crews, exerting all their strength,
endeavoured to escape with their light barks from among the dark hulls that
environed them. They were in the end all sunk, and, with the exception of two
or three prisoners, the crews drowned. Little could be got from the survivors;
but their cautious answers caused it to be surmised that several expeditions
had preceded this last, and that several Turks of rank and importance had been
conveyed to Asia. The men disdainfully repelled the idea of having deserted the
defence of their city; and one, the youngest among them, in answer to the taunt
of a sailor, exclaimed, “Take it, Christian dogs! take the palaces, the
gardens, the mosques, the abode of our fathers—take plague with them;
pestilence is the enemy we fly; if she be your friend, hug her to your bosoms.
The curse of Allah is on Stamboul, share ye her fate.”


Such was the account sent by Karazza to Raymond: but a tale full of monstrous
exaggerations, though founded on this, was spread by the accompanying troop
among our soldiers. A murmur arose, the city was the prey of pestilence;
already had a mighty power subjugated the inhabitants; Death had become lord of
Constantinople.


I have heard a picture described, wherein all the inhabitants of earth were
drawn out in fear to stand the encounter of Death. The feeble and decrepid
fled; the warriors retreated, though they threatened even in flight. Wolves and
lions, and various monsters of the desert roared against him; while the grim
Unreality hovered shaking his spectral dart, a solitary but invincible
assailant. Even so was it with the army of Greece. I am convinced, that had the
myriad troops of Asia come from over the Propontis, and stood defenders of the
Golden City, each and every Greek would have marched against the overwhelming
numbers, and have devoted himself with patriotic fury for his country. But here
no hedge of bayonets opposed itself, no death-dealing artillery, no formidable
array of brave soldiers—the unguarded walls afforded easy
entrance—the vacant palaces luxurious dwellings; but above the dome of
St. Sophia the superstitious Greek saw Pestilence, and shrunk in trepidation
from her influence.


Raymond was actuated by far other feelings. He descended the hill with a face
beaming with triumph, and pointing with his sword to the gates, commanded his
troops to—down with those barricades—the only obstacles now to
completest victory. The soldiers answered his cheerful words with aghast and
awe-struck looks; instinctively they drew back, and Raymond rode in the front
of the lines:—“By my sword I swear,” he cried, “that no
ambush or stratagem endangers you. The enemy is already vanquished; the
pleasant places, the noble dwellings and spoil of the city are already yours;
force the gate; enter and possess the seats of your ancestors, your own
inheritance!”


An universal shudder and fearful whispering passed through the lines; not a
soldier moved. “Cowards!” exclaimed their general, exasperated,
“give me an hatchet! I alone will enter! I will plant your standard; and
when you see it wave from yon highest minaret, you may gain courage, and rally
round it!”


One of the officers now came forward: “General,” he said, “we
neither fear the courage, nor arms, the open attack, nor secret ambush of the
Moslems. We are ready to expose our breasts, exposed ten thousand times before,
to the balls and scymetars of the infidels, and to fall gloriously for Greece.
But we will not die in heaps, like dogs poisoned in summer-time, by the
pestilential air of that city—we dare not go against the plague!”


A multitude of men are feeble and inert, without a voice, a leader; give them
that, and they regain the strength belonging to their numbers. Shouts from a
thousand voices now rent the air—the cry of applause became universal.
Raymond saw the danger; he was willing to save his troops from the crime of
disobedience; for he knew, that contention once begun between the commander and
his army, each act and word added to the weakness of the former, and bestowed
power on the latter. He gave orders for the retreat to be sounded, and the
regiments repaired in good order to the camp.


I hastened to carry the intelligence of these strange proceedings to Perdita;
and we were soon joined by Raymond. He looked gloomy and perturbed. My sister
was struck by my narrative: “How beyond the imagination of man,”
she exclaimed, “are the decrees of heaven, wondrous and
inexplicable!”


“Foolish girl,” cried Raymond angrily, “are you like my
valiant soldiers, panic-struck? What is there inexplicable, pray, tell me, in
so very natural an occurrence? Does not the plague rage each year in Stamboul?
What wonder, that this year, when as we are told, its virulence is unexampled
in Asia, that it should have occasioned double havoc in that city? What wonder
then, in time of siege, want, extreme heat, and drought, that it should make
unaccustomed ravages? Less wonder far is it, that the garrison, despairing of
being able to hold out longer, should take advantage of the negligence of our
fleet to escape at once from siege and capture. It is not pestilence —by
the God that lives! it is not either plague or impending danger that makes us,
like birds in harvest-time, terrified by a scarecrow, abstain from the ready
prey—it is base superstition—And thus the aim of the valiant is
made the shuttlecock of fools; the worthy ambition of the high-souled, the
plaything of these tamed hares! But yet Stamboul shall be ours! By my past
labours, by torture and imprisonment suffered for them, by my victories, by my
sword, I swear—by my hopes of fame, by my former deserts now awaiting
their reward, I deeply vow, with these hands to plant the cross on yonder
mosque!”


“Dearest Raymond!” interrupted Perdita, in a supplicating accent.


He had been walking to and fro in the marble hall of the seraglio; his very
lips were pale with rage, while, quivering, they shaped his angry words—
his eyes shot fire—his gestures seemed restrained by their very
vehemence. “Perdita,” he continued, impatiently, “I know what
you would say; I know that you love me, that you are good and gentle; but this
is no woman’s work—nor can a female heart guess at the hurricane
which tears me!”


He seemed half afraid of his own violence, and suddenly quitted the hall: a
look from Perdita shewed me her distress, and I followed him. He was pacing the
garden: his passions were in a state of inconceivable turbulence. “Am I
for ever,” he cried, “to be the sport of fortune! Must man, the
heaven-climber, be for ever the victim of the crawling reptiles of his species!
Were I as you, Lionel, looking forward to many years of life, to a succession
of love-enlightened days, to refined enjoyments and fresh-springing hopes, I
might yield, and breaking my General’s staff, seek repose in the glades
of Windsor. But I am about to die!—nay, interrupt me not—soon I
shall die. From the many-peopled earth, from the sympathies of man, from the
loved resorts of my youth, from the kindness of my friends, from the affection
of my only beloved Perdita, I am about to be removed. Such is the will of fate!
Such the decree of the High Ruler from whom there is no appeal: to whom I
submit. But to lose all—to lose with life and love, glory also! It shall
not be!


“I, and in a few brief years, all you,—this panic-struck army, and
all the population of fair Greece, will no longer be. But other generations
will arise, and ever and for ever will continue, to be made happier by our
present acts, to be glorified by our valour. The prayer of my youth was to be
one among those who render the pages of earth’s history splendid; who
exalt the race of man, and make this little globe a dwelling of the mighty.
Alas, for Raymond! the prayer of his youth is wasted—the hopes of his
manhood are null!


“From my dungeon in yonder city I cried, soon I will be thy lord! When
Evadne pronounced my death, I thought that the title of Victor of
Constantinople would be written on my tomb, and I subdued all mortal fear. I
stand before its vanquished walls, and dare not call myself a conqueror. So
shall it not be! Did not Alexander leap from the walls of the city of the
Oxydracae, to shew his coward troops the way to victory, encountering alone the
swords of its defenders? Even so will I brave the plague—and though no
man follow, I will plant the Grecian standard on the height of St.
Sophia.”


Reason came unavailing to such high-wrought feelings. In vain I shewed him,
that when winter came, the cold would dissipate the pestilential air, and
restore courage to the Greeks. “Talk not of other season than
this!” he cried. “I have lived my last winter, and the date of this
year, 2092, will be carved upon my tomb. Already do I see,” he continued,
looking up mournfully, “the bourne and precipitate edge of my existence,
over which I plunge into the gloomy mystery of the life to come. I am prepared,
so that I leave behind a trail of light so radiant, that my worst enemies
cannot cloud it. I owe this to Greece, to you, to my surviving Perdita, and to
myself, the victim of ambition.”


We were interrupted by an attendant, who announced, that the staff of Raymond
was assembled in the council-chamber. He requested me in the meantime to ride
through the camp, and to observe and report to him the dispositions of the
soldiers; he then left me. I had been excited to the utmost by the proceedings
of the day, and now more than ever by the passionate language of Raymond. Alas!
for human reason! He accused the Greeks of superstition: what name did he give
to the faith he lent to the predictions of Evadne? I passed from the palace of
Sweet Waters to the plain on which the encampment lay, and found its
inhabitants in commotion. The arrival of several with fresh stories of marvels,
from the fleet; the exaggerations bestowed on what was already known; tales of
old prophecies, of fearful histories of whole regions which had been laid waste
during the present year by pestilence, alarmed and occupied the troops.
Discipline was lost; the army disbanded itself. Each individual, before a part
of a great whole moving only in unison with others, now became resolved into
the unit nature had made him, and thought of himself only. They stole off at
first by ones and twos, then in larger companies, until, unimpeded by the
officers, whole battalions sought the road that led to Macedonia.


About midnight I returned to the palace and sought Raymond; he was alone, and
apparently composed; such composure, at least, was his as is inspired by a
resolve to adhere to a certain line of conduct. He heard my account of the
self-dissolution of the army with calmness, and then said, “You know,
Verney, my fixed determination not to quit this place, until in the light of
day Stamboul is confessedly ours. If the men I have about me shrink from
following me, others, more courageous, are to be found. Go you before break of
day, bear these dispatches to Karazza, add to them your own entreaties that he
send me his marines and naval force; if I can get but one regiment to second
me, the rest would follow of course. Let him send me this regiment. I shall
expect your return by to-morrow noon.”


Methought this was but a poor expedient; but I assured him of my obedience and
zeal. I quitted him to take a few hours rest. With the breaking of morning I
was accoutred for my ride. I lingered awhile, desirous of taking leave of
Perdita, and from my window observed the approach of the sun. The golden
splendour arose, and weary nature awoke to suffer yet another day of heat and
thirsty decay. No flowers lifted up their dew-laden cups to meet the dawn; the
dry grass had withered on the plains; the burning fields of air were vacant of
birds; the cicale alone, children of the sun, began their shrill and deafening
song among the cypresses and olives. I saw Raymond’s coal-black charger
brought to the palace gate; a small company of officers arrived soon after;
care and fear was painted on each cheek, and in each eye, unrefreshed by sleep.
I found Raymond and Perdita together. He was watching the rising sun, while
with one arm he encircled his beloved’s waist; she looked on him, the sun
of her life, with earnest gaze of mingled anxiety and tenderness. Raymond
started angrily when he saw me. “Here still?” he cried. “Is
this your promised zeal?”


“Pardon me,” I said, “but even as you speak, I am
gone.”


“Nay, pardon me,” he replied; “I have no right to command or
reproach; but my life hangs on your departure and speedy return.
Farewell!”


His voice had recovered its bland tone, but a dark cloud still hung on his
features. I would have delayed; I wished to recommend watchfulness to Perdita,
but his presence restrained me. I had no pretence for my hesitation; and on his
repeating his farewell, I clasped his outstretched hand; it was cold and
clammy. “Take care of yourself, my dear Lord,” I said.


“Nay,” said Perdita, “that task shall be mine. Return
speedily, Lionel.” With an air of absence he was playing with her auburn
locks, while she leaned on him; twice I turned back, only to look again on this
matchless pair. At last, with slow and heavy steps, I had paced out of the
hall, and sprung upon my horse. At that moment Clara flew towards me; clasping
my knee she cried, “Make haste back, uncle! Dear uncle, I have such
fearful dreams; I dare not tell my mother. Do not be long away!” I
assured her of my impatience to return, and then, with a small escort rode
along the plain towards the tower of Marmora.


I fulfilled my commission; I saw Karazza. He was somewhat surprised; he would
see, he said, what could be done; but it required time; and Raymond had ordered
me to return by noon. It was impossible to effect any thing in so short a time.
I must stay till the next day; or come back, after having reported the present
state of things to the general. My choice was easily made. A restlessness, a
fear of what was about to betide, a doubt as to Raymond’s purposes, urged
me to return without delay to his quarters. Quitting the Seven Towers, I rode
eastward towards the Sweet Waters. I took a circuitous path, principally for
the sake of going to the top of the mount before mentioned, which commanded a
view of the city. I had my glass with me. The city basked under the noon-day
sun, and the venerable walls formed its picturesque boundary. Immediately
before me was the Top Kapou, the gate near which Mahomet had made the breach by
which he entered the city. Trees gigantic and aged grew near; before the gate I
discerned a crowd of moving human figures—with intense curiosity I lifted
my glass to my eye. I saw Lord Raymond on his charger; a small company of
officers had gathered about him; and behind was a promiscuous concourse of
soldiers and subalterns, their discipline lost, their arms thrown aside; no
music sounded, no banners streamed. The only flag among them was one which
Raymond carried; he pointed with it to the gate of the city. The circle round
him fell back. With angry gestures he leapt from his horse, and seizing a
hatchet that hung from his saddle-bow, went with the apparent intention of
battering down the opposing gate. A few men came to aid him; their numbers
increased; under their united blows the obstacle was vanquished, gate,
portcullis, and fence were demolished; and the wide sun-lit way, leading to the
heart of the city, now lay open before them. The men shrank back; they seemed
afraid of what they had already done, and stood as if they expected some Mighty
Phantom to stalk in offended majesty from the opening. Raymond sprung lightly
on his horse, grasped the standard, and with words which I could not hear (but
his gestures, being their fit accompaniment, were marked by passionate energy,)
he seemed to adjure their assistance and companionship; even as he spoke, the
crowd receded from him. Indignation now transported him; his words I guessed
were fraught with disdain—then turning from his coward followers, he
addressed himself to enter the city alone. His very horse seemed to back from
the fatal entrance; his dog, his faithful dog, lay moaning and supplicating in
his path—in a moment more, he had plunged the rowels into the sides of
the stung animal, who bounded forward, and he, the gateway passed, was
galloping up the broad and desart street.


Until this moment my soul had been in my eyes only. I had gazed with wonder,
mixed with fear and enthusiasm. The latter feeling now predominated. I forgot
the distance between us: “I will go with thee, Raymond!” I cried;
but, my eye removed from the glass, I could scarce discern the pigmy forms of
the crowd, which about a mile from me surrounded the gate; the form of Raymond
was lost. Stung with impatience, I urged my horse with force of spur and
loosened reins down the acclivity, that, before danger could arrive, I might be
at the side of my noble, godlike friend. A number of buildings and trees
intervened, when I had reached the plain, hiding the city from my view. But at
that moment a crash was heard. Thunderlike it reverberated through the sky,
while the air was darkened. A moment more and the old walls again met my sight,
while over them hovered a murky cloud; fragments of buildings whirled above,
half seen in smoke, while flames burst out beneath, and continued explosions
filled the air with terrific thunders. Flying from the mass of falling ruin
which leapt over the high walls, and shook the ivy towers, a crowd of soldiers
made for the road by which I came; I was surrounded, hemmed in by them, unable
to get forward. My impatience rose to its utmost; I stretched out my hands to
the men; I conjured them to turn back and save their General, the conqueror of
Stamboul, the liberator of Greece; tears, aye tears, in warm flow gushed from
my eyes—I would not believe in his destruction; yet every mass that
darkened the air seemed to bear with it a portion of the martyred Raymond.
Horrible sights were shaped to me in the turbid cloud that hovered over the
city; and my only relief was derived from the struggles I made to approach the
gate. Yet when I effected my purpose, all I could discern within the precincts
of the massive walls was a city of fire: the open way through which Raymond had
ridden was enveloped in smoke and flame. After an interval the explosions
ceased, but the flames still shot up from various quarters; the dome of St.
Sophia had disappeared. Strange to say (the result perhaps of the concussion of
air occasioned by the blowing up of the city) huge, white thunder clouds lifted
themselves up from the southern horizon, and gathered over-head; they were the
first blots on the blue expanse that I had seen for months, and amidst this
havoc and despair they inspired pleasure. The vault above became obscured,
lightning flashed from the heavy masses, followed instantaneously by crashing
thunder; then the big rain fell. The flames of the city bent beneath it; and
the smoke and dust arising from the ruins was dissipated.


I no sooner perceived an abatement of the flames than, hurried on by an
irresistible impulse, I endeavoured to penetrate the town. I could only do this
on foot, as the mass of ruin was impracticable for a horse. I had never entered
the city before, and its ways were unknown to me. The streets were blocked up,
the ruins smoking; I climbed up one heap, only to view others in succession;
and nothing told me where the centre of the town might be, or towards what
point Raymond might have directed his course. The rain ceased; the clouds sunk
behind the horizon; it was now evening, and the sun descended swiftly the
western sky. I scrambled on, until I came to a street, whose wooden houses,
half-burnt, had been cooled by the rain, and were fortunately uninjured by the
gunpowder. Up this I hurried—until now I had not seen a vestige of man.
Yet none of the defaced human forms which I distinguished, could be Raymond; so
I turned my eyes away, while my heart sickened within me. I came to an open
space—a mountain of ruin in the midst, announced that some large mosque
had occupied the space—and here, scattered about, I saw various articles
of luxury and wealth, singed, destroyed—but shewing what they had been in
their ruin—jewels, strings of pearls, embroidered robes, rich furs,
glittering tapestries, and oriental ornaments, seemed to have been collected
here in a pile destined for destruction; but the rain had stopped the havoc
midway.


Hours passed, while in this scene of ruin I sought for Raymond. Insurmountable
heaps sometimes opposed themselves; the still burning fires scorched me. The
sun set; the atmosphere grew dim—and the evening star no longer shone
companionless. The glare of flames attested the progress of destruction, while,
during mingled light and obscurity, the piles around me took gigantic
proportions and weird shapes. For a moment I could yield to the creative power
of the imagination, and for a moment was soothed by the sublime fictions it
presented to me. The beatings of my human heart drew me back to blank reality.
Where, in this wilderness of death, art thou, O Raymond—ornament of
England, deliverer of Greece, “hero of unwritten story,” where in
this burning chaos are thy dear relics strewed? I called aloud for
him—through the darkness of night, over the scorching ruins of fallen
Constantinople, his name was heard; no voice replied—echo even was mute.


I was overcome by weariness; the solitude depressed my spirits. The sultry air
impregnated with dust, the heat and smoke of burning palaces, palsied my limbs.
Hunger suddenly came acutely upon me. The excitement which had hitherto
sustained me was lost; as a building, whose props are loosened, and whose
foundations rock, totters and falls, so when enthusiasm and hope deserted me,
did my strength fail. I sat on the sole remaining step of an edifice, which
even in its downfall, was huge and magnificent; a few broken walls, not
dislodged by gunpowder, stood in fantastic groupes, and a flame glimmered at
intervals on the summit of the pile. For a time hunger and sleep contended,
till the constellations reeled before my eyes and then were lost. I strove to
rise, but my heavy lids closed, my limbs over-wearied, claimed repose—I
rested my head on the stone, I yielded to the grateful sensation of utter
forgetfulness; and in that scene of desolation, on that night of
despair—I slept.


 [3]
Calderon de la Barca.

</div></body></text></TEI>