<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="28">
CHAPTER V.

After the repose of a few days, we held a council, to decide on our future
movements. Our first plan had been to quit our wintry native latitude, and seek
for our diminished numbers the luxuries and delights of a southern climate. We
had not fixed on any precise spot as the termination of our wanderings; but a
vague picture of perpetual spring, fragrant groves, and sparkling streams,
floated in our imagination to entice us on. A variety of causes had detained us
in England, and we had now arrived at the middle of February; if we pursued our
original project, we should find ourselves in a worse situation than before,
having exchanged our temperate climate for the intolerable heats of a summer in
Egypt or Persia. We were therefore obliged to modify our plan, as the season
continued to be inclement; and it was determined that we should await the
arrival of spring in our present abode, and so order our future movements as to
pass the hot months in the icy vallies of Switzerland, deferring our southern
progress until the ensuing autumn, if such a season was ever again to be beheld
by us.


The castle and town of Versailles afforded our numbers ample accommodation, and
foraging parties took it by turns to supply our wants. There was a strange and
appalling motley in the situation of these the last of the race. At first I
likened it to a colony, which borne over the far seas, struck root for the
first time in a new country. But where was the bustle and industry
characteristic of such an assemblage; the rudely constructed dwelling, which
was to suffice till a more commodious mansion could be built; the marking out
of fields; the attempt at cultivation; the eager curiosity to discover unknown
animals and herbs; the excursions for the sake of exploring the country? Our
habitations were palaces—our food was ready stored in
granaries—there was no need of labour, no inquisitiveness, no restless
desire to get on. If we had been assured that we should secure the lives of our
present numbers, there would have been more vivacity and hope in our councils.
We should have discussed as to the period when the existing produce for
man’s sustenance would no longer suffice for us, and what mode of life we
should then adopt. We should have considered more carefully our future plans,
and debated concerning the spot where we should in future dwell. But summer and
the plague were near, and we dared not look forward. Every heart sickened at
the thought of amusement; if the younger part of our community were ever
impelled, by youthful and untamed hilarity, to enter on any dance or song, to
cheer the melancholy time, they would suddenly break off, checked by a mournful
look or agonizing sigh from any one among them, who was prevented by sorrows
and losses from mingling in the festivity. If laughter echoed under our roof,
yet the heart was vacant of joy; and, when ever it chanced that I witnessed
such attempts at pastime, they encreased instead of diminishing my sense of
woe. In the midst of the pleasure-hunting throng, I would close my eyes, and
see before me the obscure cavern, where was garnered the mortality of Idris,
and the dead lay around, mouldering in hushed repose. When I again became aware
of the present hour, softest melody of Lydian flute, or harmonious maze of
graceful dance, was but as the demoniac chorus in the Wolf’s Glen, and
the caperings of the reptiles that surrounded the magic circle.


My dearest interval of peace occurred, when, released from the obligation of
associating with the crowd, I could repose in the dear home where my children
lived. Children I say, for the tenderest emotions of paternity bound me to
Clara. She was now fourteen; sorrow, and deep insight into the scenes around
her, calmed the restless spirit of girlhood; while the remembrance of her
father whom she idolized, and respect for me and Adrian, implanted an high
sense of duty in her young heart. Though serious she was not sad; the eager
desire that makes us all, when young, plume our wings, and stretch our necks,
that we may more swiftly alight tiptoe on the height of maturity, was subdued
in her by early experience. All that she could spare of overflowing love from
her parents’ memory, and attention to her living relatives, was spent
upon religion. This was the hidden law of her heart, which she concealed with
childish reserve, and cherished the more because it was secret. What faith so
entire, what charity so pure, what hope so fervent, as that of early youth? and
she, all love, all tenderness and trust, who from infancy had been tossed on
the wide sea of passion and misfortune, saw the finger of apparent divinity in
all, and her best hope was to make herself acceptable to the power she
worshipped. Evelyn was only five years old; his joyous heart was incapable of
sorrow, and he enlivened our house with the innocent mirth incident to his
years.


The aged Countess of Windsor had fallen from her dream of power, rank and
grandeur; she had been suddenly seized with the conviction, that love was the
only good of life, virtue the only ennobling distinction and enriching wealth.
Such a lesson had been taught her by the dead lips of her neglected daughter;
and she devoted herself, with all the fiery violence of her character, to the
obtaining the affection of the remnants of her family. In early years the heart
of Adrian had been chilled towards her; and, though he observed a due respect,
her coldness, mixed with the recollection of disappointment and madness, caused
him to feel even pain in her society. She saw this, and yet determined to win
his love; the obstacle served the rather to excite her ambition. As Henry,
Emperor of Germany, lay in the snow before Pope Leo’s gate for three
winter days and nights, so did she in humility wait before the icy barriers of
his closed heart, till he, the servant of love, and prince of tender courtesy,
opened it wide for her admittance, bestowing, with fervency and gratitude, the
tribute of filial affection she merited. Her understanding, courage, and
presence of mind, became powerful auxiliaries to him in the difficult task of
ruling the tumultuous crowd, which were subjected to his control, in truth by a
single hair.


The principal circumstances that disturbed our tranquillity during this
interval, originated in the vicinity of the impostor-prophet and his followers.
They continued to reside at Paris; but missionaries from among them often
visited Versailles—and such was the power of assertions, however false,
yet vehemently iterated, over the ready credulity of the ignorant and fearful,
that they seldom failed in drawing over to their party some from among our
numbers. An instance of this nature coming immediately under our notice, we
were led to consider the miserable state in which we should leave our
countrymen, when we should, at the approach of summer, move on towards
Switzerland, and leave a deluded crew behind us in the hands of their miscreant
leader. The sense of the smallness of our numbers, and expectation of decrease,
pressed upon us; and, while it would be a subject of congratulation to
ourselves to add one to our party, it would be doubly gratifying to rescue from
the pernicious influence of superstition and unrelenting tyranny, the victims
that now, though voluntarily enchained, groaned beneath it. If we had
considered the preacher as sincere in a belief of his own denunciations, or
only moderately actuated by kind feeling in the exercise of his assumed powers,
we should have immediately addressed ourselves to him, and endeavoured with our
best arguments to soften and humanize his views. But he was instigated by
ambition, he desired to rule over these last stragglers from the fold of death;
his projects went so far, as to cause him to calculate that, if, from these
crushed remains, a few survived, so that a new race should spring up, he, by
holding tight the reins of belief, might be remembered by the post-pestilential
race as a patriarch, a prophet, nay a deity; such as of old among the
post-diluvians were Jupiter the conqueror, Serapis the lawgiver, and Vishnou
the preserver. These ideas made him inflexible in his rule, and violent in his
hate of any who presumed to share with him his usurped empire.


It is a strange fact, but incontestible, that the philanthropist, who ardent in
his desire to do good, who patient, reasonable and gentle, yet disdains to use
other argument than truth, has less influence over men’s minds, than he
who, grasping and selfish, refuses not to adopt any means, nor awaken any
passion, nor diffuse any falsehood, for the advancement of his cause. If this
from time immemorial has been the case, the contrast was infinitely greater,
now that the one could bring harrowing fears and transcendent hopes into play;
while the other had few hopes to hold forth, nor could influence the
imagination to diminish the fears which he himself was the first to entertain.
The preacher had persuaded his followers, that their escape from the plague,
the salvation of their children, and the rise of a new race of men from their
seed, depended on their faith in, and their submission to him. They greedily
imbibed this belief; and their over-weening credulity even rendered them eager
to make converts to the same faith.


How to seduce any individuals from such an alliance of fraud, was a frequent
subject of Adrian’s meditations and discourse. He formed many plans for
the purpose; but his own troop kept him in full occupation to ensure their
fidelity and safety; beside which the preacher was as cautious and prudent, as
he was cruel. His victims lived under the strictest rules and laws, which
either entirely imprisoned them within the Tuileries, or let them out in such
numbers, and under such leaders, as precluded the possibility of controversy.
There was one among them however whom I resolved to save; she had been known to
us in happier days; Idris had loved her; and her excellent nature made it
peculiarly lamentable that she should be sacrificed by this merciless cannibal
of souls.


This man had between two and three hundred persons enlisted under his banners.
More than half of them were women; there were about fifty children of all ages;
and not more than eighty men. They were mostly drawn from that which, when such
distinctions existed, was denominated the lower rank of society. The exceptions
consisted of a few high-born females, who, panic-struck, and tamed by sorrow,
had joined him. Among these was one, young, lovely, and enthusiastic, whose
very goodness made her a more easy victim. I have mentioned her before: Juliet,
the youngest daughter, and now sole relic of the ducal house of L—-.
There are some beings, whom fate seems to select on whom to pour, in unmeasured
portion, the vials of her wrath, and whom she bathes even to the lips in
misery. Such a one was the ill-starred Juliet. She had lost her indulgent
parents, her brothers and sisters, companions of her youth; in one fell swoop
they had been carried off from her. Yet she had again dared to call herself
happy; united to her admirer, to him who possessed and filled her whole heart,
she yielded to the lethean powers of love, and knew and felt only his life and
presence. At the very time when with keen delight she welcomed the tokens of
maternity, this sole prop of her life failed, her husband died of the plague.
For a time she had been lulled in insanity; the birth of her child restored her
to the cruel reality of things, but gave her at the same time an object for
whom to preserve at once life and reason. Every friend and relative had died
off, and she was reduced to solitude and penury; deep melancholy and angry
impatience distorted her judgment, so that she could not persuade herself to
disclose her distress to us. When she heard of the plan of universal
emigration, she resolved to remain behind with her child, and alone in wide
England to live or die, as fate might decree, beside the grave of her beloved.
She had hidden herself in one of the many empty habitations of London; it was
she who rescued my Idris on the fatal twentieth of November, though my
immediate danger, and the subsequent illness of Idris, caused us to forget our
hapless friend. This circumstance had however brought her again in contact with
her fellow-creatures; a slight illness of her infant, proved to her that she
was still bound to humanity by an indestructible tie; to preserve this little
creature’s life became the object of her being, and she joined the first
division of migrants who went over to Paris.


She became an easy prey to the methodist; her sensibility and acute fears
rendered her accessible to every impulse; her love for her child made her eager
to cling to the merest straw held out to save him. Her mind, once unstrung, and
now tuned by roughest inharmonious hands, made her credulous: beautiful as
fabled goddess, with voice of unrivalled sweetness, burning with new lighted
enthusiasm, she became a stedfast proselyte, and powerful auxiliary to the
leader of the elect. I had remarked her in the crowd, on the day we met on the
Place Vendome; and, recollecting suddenly her providential rescue of my lost
one, on the night of the twentieth of November, I reproached myself for my
neglect and ingratitude, and felt impelled to leave no means that I could adopt
untried, to recall her to her better self, and rescue her from the fangs of the
hypocrite destroyer.


I will not, at this period of my story, record the artifices I used to
penetrate the asylum of the Tuileries, or give what would be a tedious account
of my stratagems, disappointments, and perseverance. I at last succeeded in
entering these walls, and roamed its halls and corridors in eager hope to find
my selected convert. In the evening I contrived to mingle unobserved with the
congregation, which assembled in the chapel to listen to the crafty and
eloquent harangue of their prophet. I saw Juliet near him. Her dark eyes,
fearfully impressed with the restless glare of madness, were fixed on him; she
held her infant, not yet a year old, in her arms; and care of it alone could
distract her attention from the words to which she eagerly listened. After the
sermon was over, the congregation dispersed; all quitted the chapel except she
whom I sought; her babe had fallen asleep; so she placed it on a cushion, and
sat on the floor beside, watching its tranquil slumber.


I presented myself to her; for a moment natural feeling produced a sentiment of
gladness, which disappeared again, when with ardent and affectionate
exhortation I besought her to accompany me in flight from this den of
superstition and misery. In a moment she relapsed into the delirium of
fanaticism, and, but that her gentle nature forbade, would have loaded me with
execrations. She conjured me, she commanded me to leave her—
“Beware, O beware,” she cried, “fly while yet your escape is
practicable. Now you are safe; but strange sounds and inspirations come on me
at times, and if the Eternal should in awful whisper reveal to me his will,
that to save my child you must be sacrificed, I would call in the satellites of
him you call the tyrant; they would tear you limb from limb; nor would I hallow
the death of him whom Idris loved, by a single tear.”


She spoke hurriedly, with tuneless voice, and wild look; her child awoke, and,
frightened, began to cry; each sob went to the ill-fated mother’s heart,
and she mingled the epithets of endearment she addressed to her infant, with
angry commands that I should leave her. Had I had the means, I would have
risked all, have torn her by force from the murderer’s den, and trusted
to the healing balm of reason and affection. But I had no choice, no power even
of longer struggle; steps were heard along the gallery, and the voice of the
preacher drew near. Juliet, straining her child in a close embrace, fled by
another passage. Even then I would have followed her; but my foe and his
satellites entered; I was surrounded, and taken prisoner.


I remembered the menace of the unhappy Juliet, and expected the full tempest of
the man’s vengeance, and the awakened wrath of his followers, to fall
instantly upon me. I was questioned. My answers were simple and sincere.
“His own mouth condemns him,” exclaimed the impostor; “he
confesses that his intention was to seduce from the way of salvation our
well-beloved sister in God; away with him to the dungeon; to-morrow he dies the
death; we are manifestly called upon to make an example, tremendous and
appalling, to scare the children of sin from our asylum of the saved.”


My heart revolted from his hypocritical jargon: but it was unworthy of me to
combat in words with the ruffian; and my answer was cool; while, far from being
possessed with fear, methought, even at the worst, a man true to himself,
courageous and determined, could fight his way, even from the boards of the
scaffold, through the herd of these misguided maniacs. “Remember,”
I said, “who I am; and be well assured that I shall not die unavenged.
Your legal magistrate, the Lord Protector, knew of my design, and is aware that
I am here; the cry of blood will reach him, and you and your miserable victims
will long lament the tragedy you are about to act.”


My antagonist did not deign to reply, even by a look;—“You know
your duty,” he said to his comrades,—“obey.”


In a moment I was thrown on the earth, bound, blindfolded, and hurried away
—liberty of limb and sight was only restored to me, when, surrounded by
dungeon-walls, dark and impervious, I found myself a prisoner and alone.


Such was the result of my attempt to gain over the proselyte of this man of
crime; I could not conceive that he would dare put me to death.—Yet I was
in his hands; the path of his ambition had ever been dark and cruel; his power
was founded upon fear; the one word which might cause me to die, unheard,
unseen, in the obscurity of my dungeon, might be easier to speak than the deed
of mercy to act. He would not risk probably a public execution; but a private
assassination would at once terrify any of my companions from attempting a like
feat, at the same time that a cautious line of conduct might enable him to
avoid the enquiries and the vengeance of Adrian.


Two months ago, in a vault more obscure than the one I now inhabited, I had
revolved the design of quietly laying me down to die; now I shuddered at the
approach of fate. My imagination was busied in shaping forth the kind of death
he would inflict. Would he allow me to wear out life with famine; or was the
food administered to me to be medicined with death? Would he steal on me in my
sleep; or should I contend to the last with my murderers, knowing, even while I
struggled, that I must be overcome? I lived upon an earth whose diminished
population a child’s arithmetic might number; I had lived through long
months with death stalking close at my side, while at intervals the shadow of
his skeleton-shape darkened my path. I had believed that I despised the grim
phantom, and laughed his power to scorn.


Any other fate I should have met with courage, nay, have gone out gallantly to
encounter. But to be murdered thus at the midnight hour by cold-blooded
assassins, no friendly hand to close my eyes, or receive my parting
blessing—to die in combat, hate and execration—ah, why, my angel
love, didst thou restore me to life, when already I had stepped within the
portals of the tomb, now that so soon again I was to be flung back a mangled
corpse!


Hours passed—centuries. Could I give words to the many thoughts which
occupied me in endless succession during this interval, I should fill volumes.
The air was dank, the dungeon-floor mildewed and icy cold; hunger came upon me
too, and no sound reached me from without. To-morrow the ruffian had declared
that I should die. When would to-morrow come? Was it not already here?


My door was about to be opened. I heard the key turn, and the bars and bolts
slowly removed. The opening of intervening passages permitted sounds from the
interior of the palace to reach me; and I heard the clock strike one. They come
to murder me, I thought; this hour does not befit a public execution. I drew
myself up against the wall opposite the entrance; I collected my forces, I
rallied my courage, I would not fall a tame prey. Slowly the door receded on
its hinges—I was ready to spring forward to seize and grapple with the
intruder, till the sight of who it was changed at once the temper of my mind.
It was Juliet herself; pale and trembling she stood, a lamp in her hand, on the
threshold of the dungeon, looking at me with wistful countenance. But in a
moment she re-assumed her self-possession; and her languid eyes recovered their
brilliancy. She said, “I am come to save you, Verney.”


“And yourself also,” I cried: “dearest friend, can we indeed
be saved?”


“Not a word,” she replied, “follow me!”


I obeyed instantly. We threaded with light steps many corridors, ascended
several flights of stairs, and passed through long galleries; at the end of one
she unlocked a low portal; a rush of wind extinguished our lamp; but, in lieu
of it, we had the blessed moon-beams and the open face of heaven. Then first
Juliet spoke:—“You are safe,” she said, “God bless
you!— farewell!”


I seized her reluctant hand—“Dear friend,” I cried,
“misguided victim, do you not intend to escape with me? Have you not
risked all in facilitating my flight? and do you think, that I will permit you
to return, and suffer alone the effects of that miscreant’s rage?
Never!”


“Do not fear for me,” replied the lovely girl mournfully,
“and do not imagine that without the consent of our chief you could be
without these walls. It is he that has saved you; he assigned to me the part of
leading you hither, because I am best acquainted with your motives for coming
here, and can best appreciate his mercy in permitting you to depart.”


“And are you,” I cried, “the dupe of this man? He dreads me
alive as an enemy, and dead he fears my avengers. By favouring this clandestine
escape he preserves a shew of consistency to his followers; but mercy is far
from his heart. Do you forget his artifices, his cruelty, and fraud? As I am
free, so are you. Come, Juliet, the mother of our lost Idris will welcome you,
the noble Adrian will rejoice to receive you; you will find peace and love, and
better hopes than fanaticism can afford. Come, and fear not; long before day we
shall be at Versailles; close the door on this abode of crime —come,
sweet Juliet, from hypocrisy and guilt to the society of the affectionate and
good.”


I spoke hurriedly, but with fervour: and while with gentle violence I drew her
from the portal, some thought, some recollection of past scenes of youth and
happiness, made her listen and yield to me; suddenly she broke away with a
piercing shriek:—“My child, my child! he has my child; my darling
girl is my hostage.”


She darted from me into the passage; the gate closed between us—she was
left in the fangs of this man of crime, a prisoner, still to inhale the
pestilential atmosphere which adhered to his demoniac nature; the unimpeded
breeze played on my cheek, the moon shone graciously upon me, my path was free.
Glad to have escaped, yet melancholy in my very joy, I retrod my steps to
Versailles.

</div></body></text></TEI>