<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="20">
CHAPTER VII.

I did proceed to Windsor, but not with the intention of remaining there. I went
but to obtain the consent of Idris, and then to return and take my station
beside my unequalled friend; to share his labours, and save him, if so it must
be, at the expence of my life. Yet I dreaded to witness the anguish which my
resolve might excite in Idris. I had vowed to my own heart never to shadow her
countenance even with transient grief, and should I prove recreant at the hour
of greatest need? I had begun my journey with anxious haste; now I desired to
draw it out through the course of days and months. I longed to avoid the
necessity of action; I strove to escape from
thought—vainly—futurity, like a dark image in a phantasmagoria,
came nearer and more near, till it clasped the whole earth in its shadow.


A slight circumstance induced me to alter my usual route, and to return home by
Egham and Bishopgate. I alighted at Perdita’s ancient abode, her cottage;
and, sending forward the carriage, determined to walk across the park to the
castle. This spot, dedicated to sweetest recollections, the deserted house and
neglected garden were well adapted to nurse my melancholy. In our happiest
days, Perdita had adorned her cottage with every aid art might bring, to that
which nature had selected to favour. In the same spirit of exaggeration she
had, on the event of her separation from Raymond, caused it to be entirely
neglected. It was now in ruin: the deer had climbed the broken palings, and
reposed among the flowers; grass grew on the threshold, and the swinging
lattice creaking to the wind, gave signal of utter desertion. The sky was blue
above, and the air impregnated with fragrance by the rare flowers that grew
among the weeds. The trees moved overhead, awakening nature’s favourite
melody—but the melancholy appearance of the choaked paths, and weed-grown
flower-beds, dimmed even this gay summer scene. The time when in proud and
happy security we assembled at this cottage, was gone—soon the present
hours would join those past, and shadows of future ones rose dark and menacing
from the womb of time, their cradle and their bier. For the first time in my
life I envied the sleep of the dead, and thought with pleasure of one’s
bed under the sod, where grief and fear have no power. I passed through the gap
of the broken paling—I felt, while I disdained, the choaking
tears—I rushed into the depths of the forest. O death and change, rulers
of our life, where are ye, that I may grapple with you! What was there in our
tranquillity, that excited your envy—in our happiness, that ye should
destroy it? We were happy, loving, and beloved; the horn of Amalthea contained
no blessing unshowered upon us, but, alas!


        la fortuna
deidad barbara importuna,
oy cadaver y ayer flor,
no permanece jamas![8]


As I wandered on thus ruminating, a number of country people passed me. They
seemed full of careful thought, and a few words of their conversation that
reached me, induced me to approach and make further enquiries. A party of
people flying from London, as was frequent in those days, had come up the
Thames in a boat. No one at Windsor would afford them shelter; so, going a
little further up, they remained all night in a deserted hut near
Bolter’s lock. They pursued their way the following morning, leaving one
of their company behind them, sick of the plague. This circumstance once spread
abroad, none dared approach within half a mile of the infected neighbourhood,
and the deserted wretch was left to fight with disease and death in solitude,
as he best might. I was urged by compassion to hasten to the hut, for the
purpose of ascertaining his situation, and administering to his wants.


As I advanced I met knots of country-people talking earnestly of this event:
distant as they were from the apprehended contagion, fear was impressed on
every countenance. I passed by a group of these terrorists, in a lane in the
direct road to the hut. One of them stopped me, and, conjecturing that I was
ignorant of the circumstance, told me not to go on, for that an infected person
lay but at a short distance.


“I know it,” I replied, “and I am going to see in what
condition the poor fellow is.”


A murmur of surprise and horror ran through the assembly. I
continued:—“This poor wretch is deserted, dying, succourless; in
these unhappy times, God knows how soon any or all of us may be in like want. I
am going to do, as I would be done by.”


“But you will never be able to return to the Castle—Lady
Idris—his children—” in confused speech were the words that
struck my ear.


“Do you not know, my friends,” I said, “that the Earl
himself, now Lord Protector, visits daily, not only those probably infected by
this disease, but the hospitals and pest houses, going near, and even touching
the sick? yet he was never in better health. You labour under an entire mistake
as to the nature of the plague; but do not fear, I do not ask any of you to
accompany me, nor to believe me, until I return safe and sound from my
patient.”


So I left them, and hurried on. I soon arrived at the hut: the door was ajar. I
entered, and one glance assured me that its former inhabitant was no
more—he lay on a heap of straw, cold and stiff; while a pernicious
effluvia filled the room, and various stains and marks served to shew the
virulence of the disorder.


I had never before beheld one killed by pestilence. While every mind was full
of dismay at its effects, a craving for excitement had led us to peruse De
Foe’s account, and the masterly delineations of the author of Arthur
Mervyn. The pictures drawn in these books were so vivid, that we seemed to have
experienced the results depicted by them. But cold were the sensations excited
by words, burning though they were, and describing the death and misery of
thousands, compared to what I felt in looking on the corpse of this unhappy
stranger. This indeed was the plague. I raised his rigid limbs, I marked the
distortion of his face, and the stony eyes lost to perception. As I was thus
occupied, chill horror congealed my blood, making my flesh quiver and my hair
to stand on end. Half insanely I spoke to the dead. So the plague killed you, I
muttered. How came this? Was the coming painful? You look as if the enemy had
tortured, before he murdered you. And now I leapt up precipitately, and escaped
from the hut, before nature could revoke her laws, and inorganic words be
breathed in answer from the lips of the departed.


On returning through the lane, I saw at a distance the same assemblage of
persons which I had left. They hurried away, as soon as they saw me; my
agitated mien added to their fear of coming near one who had entered within the
verge of contagion.


At a distance from facts one draws conclusions which appear infallible, which
yet when put to the test of reality, vanish like unreal dreams. I had ridiculed
the fears of my countrymen, when they related to others; now that they came
home to myself, I paused. The Rubicon, I felt, was passed; and it behoved me
well to reflect what I should do on this hither side of disease and danger.
According to the vulgar superstition, my dress, my person, the air I breathed,
bore in it mortal danger to myself and others. Should I return to the Castle,
to my wife and children, with this taint upon me? Not surely if I were
infected; but I felt certain that I was not—a few hours would determine
the question—I would spend these in the forest, in reflection on what was
to come, and what my future actions were to be. In the feeling communicated to
me by the sight of one struck by the plague, I forgot the events that had
excited me so strongly in London; new and more painful prospects, by degrees
were cleared of the mist which had hitherto veiled them. The question was no
longer whether I should share Adrian’s toils and danger; but in what
manner I could, in Windsor and the neighbourhood, imitate the prudence and zeal
which, under his government, produced order and plenty in London, and how, now
pestilence had spread more widely, I could secure the health of my own family.


I spread the whole earth out as a map before me. On no one spot of its surface
could I put my finger and say, here is safety. In the south, the disease,
virulent and immedicable, had nearly annihilated the race of man; storm and
inundation, poisonous winds and blights, filled up the measure of suffering. In
the north it was worse—the lesser population gradually declined, and
famine and plague kept watch on the survivors, who, helpless and feeble, were
ready to fall an easy prey into their hands.


I contracted my view to England. The overgrown metropolis, the great heart of
mighty Britain, was pulseless. Commerce had ceased. All resort for ambition or
pleasure was cut off—the streets were grass-grown—the houses
empty—the few, that from necessity remained, seemed already branded with
the taint of inevitable pestilence. In the larger manufacturing towns the same
tragedy was acted on a smaller, yet more disastrous scale. There was no Adrian
to superintend and direct, while whole flocks of the poor were struck and
killed. Yet we were not all to die. No truly, though thinned, the race of man
would continue, and the great plague would, in after years, become matter of
history and wonder. Doubtless this visitation was for extent
unexampled—more need that we should work hard to dispute its progress;
ere this men have gone out in sport, and slain their thousands and tens of
thousands; but now man had become a creature of price; the life of one of them
was of more worth than the so called treasures of kings. Look at his
thought-endued countenance, his graceful limbs, his majestic brow, his wondrous
mechanism—the type and model of this best work of God is not to be cast
aside as a broken vessel—he shall be preserved, and his children and his
children’s children carry down the name and form of man to latest time.


Above all I must guard those entrusted by nature and fate to my especial care.
And surely, if among all my fellow-creatures I were to select those who might
stand forth examples of the greatness and goodness of man, I could choose no
other than those allied to me by the most sacred ties. Some from among the
family of man must survive, and these should be among the survivors; that
should be my task—to accomplish it my own life were a small sacrifice.
There then in that castle—in Windsor Castle, birth-place of Idris and my
babes, should be the haven and retreat for the wrecked bark of human society.
Its forest should be our world—its garden afford us food; within its
walls I would establish the shaken throne of health. I was an outcast and a
vagabond, when Adrian gently threw over me the silver net of love and
civilization, and linked me inextricably to human charities and human
excellence. I was one, who, though an aspirant after good, and an ardent lover
of wisdom, was yet unenrolled in any list of worth, when Idris, the princely
born, who was herself the personification of all that was divine in woman, she
who walked the earth like a poet’s dream, as a carved goddess endued with
sense, or pictured saint stepping from the canvas—she, the most worthy,
chose me, and gave me herself—a priceless gift.


During several hours I continued thus to meditate, till hunger and fatigue
brought me back to the passing hour, then marked by long shadows cast from the
descending sun. I had wandered towards Bracknel, far to the west of Windsor.
The feeling of perfect health which I enjoyed, assured me that I was free from
contagion. I remembered that Idris had been kept in ignorance of my
proceedings. She might have heard of my return from London, and my visit to
Bolter’s Lock, which, connected with my continued absence, might tend
greatly to alarm her. I returned to Windsor by the Long Walk, and passing
through the town towards the Castle, I found it in a state of agitation and
disturbance.


“It is too late to be ambitious,” says Sir Thomas Browne. “We
cannot hope to live so long in our names as some have done in their persons;
one face of Janus holds no proportion to the other.” Upon this text many
fanatics arose, who prophesied that the end of time was come. The spirit of
superstition had birth, from the wreck of our hopes, and antics wild and
dangerous were played on the great theatre, while the remaining particle of
futurity dwindled into a point in the eyes of the prognosticators.
Weak-spirited women died of fear as they listened to their denunciations; men
of robust form and seeming strength fell into idiotcy and madness, racked by
the dread of coming eternity. A man of this kind was now pouring forth his
eloquent despair among the inhabitants of Windsor. The scene of the morning,
and my visit to the dead, which had been spread abroad, had alarmed the
country-people, so they had become fit instruments to be played upon by a
maniac.


The poor wretch had lost his young wife and lovely infant by the plague. He was
a mechanic; and, rendered unable to attend to the occupation which supplied his
necessities, famine was added to his other miseries. He left the chamber which
contained his wife and child—wife and child no more, but “dead
earth upon the earth”—wild with hunger, watching and grief, his
diseased fancy made him believe himself sent by heaven to preach the end of
time to the world. He entered the churches, and foretold to the congregations
their speedy removal to the vaults below. He appeared like the forgotten spirit
of the time in the theatres, and bade the spectators go home and die. He had
been seized and confined; he had escaped and wandered from London among the
neighbouring towns, and, with frantic gestures and thrilling words, he unveiled
to each their hidden fears, and gave voice to the soundless thought they dared
not syllable. He stood under the arcade of the town-hall of Windsor, and from
this elevation harangued a trembling crowd.


“Hear, O ye inhabitants of the earth,” he cried, “hear thou,
all seeing, but most pitiless Heaven! hear thou too, O tempest-tossed heart,
which breathes out these words, yet faints beneath their meaning! Death is
among us! The earth is beautiful and flower-bedecked, but she is our grave! The
clouds of heaven weep for us—the pageantry of the stars is but our
funeral torchlight. Grey headed men, ye hoped for yet a few years in your
long-known abode—but the lease is up, you must remove—children, ye
will never reach maturity, even now the small grave is dug for ye—
mothers, clasp them in your arms, one death embraces you!”


Shuddering, he stretched out his hands, his eyes cast up, seemed bursting from
their sockets, while he appeared to follow shapes, to us invisible, in the
yielding air—“There they are,” he cried, “the dead!
They rise in their shrouds, and pass in silent procession towards the far land
of their doom—their bloodless lips move not—their shadowy limbs are
void of motion, while still they glide onwards. We come,” he exclaimed,
springing forwards, “for what should we wait? Haste, my friends, apparel
yourselves in the court-dress of death. Pestilence will usher you to his
presence. Why thus long? they, the good, the wise, and the beloved, are gone
before. Mothers, kiss you last—husbands, protectors no more, lead on the
partners of your death! Come, O come! while the dear ones are yet in sight, for
soon they will pass away, and we never never shall join them more.”


From such ravings as these, he would suddenly become collected, and with
unexaggerated but terrific words, paint the horrors of the time; describe with
minute detail, the effects of the plague on the human frame, and tell
heart-breaking tales of the snapping of dear affinities—the gasping
horror of despair over the death-bed of the last beloved—so that groans
and even shrieks burst from the crowd. One man in particular stood in front,
his eyes fixt on the prophet, his mouth open, his limbs rigid, while his face
changed to various colours, yellow, blue, and green, through intense fear. The
maniac caught his glance, and turned his eye on him— one has heard of the
gaze of the rattle-snake, which allures the trembling victim till he falls
within his jaws. The maniac became composed; his person rose higher; authority
beamed from his countenance. He looked on the peasant, who began to tremble,
while he still gazed; his knees knocked together; his teeth chattered. He at
last fell down in convulsions. “That man has the plague,” said the
maniac calmly. A shriek burst from the lips of the poor wretch; and then sudden
motionlessness came over him; it was manifest to all that he was dead.


Cries of horror filled the place—every one endeavoured to effect his
escape—in a few minutes the market place was cleared—the corpse lay
on the ground; and the maniac, subdued and exhausted, sat beside it, leaning
his gaunt cheek upon his thin hand. Soon some people, deputed by the
magistrates, came to remove the body; the unfortunate being saw a jailor in
each—he fled precipitately, while I passed onwards to the Castle.


Death, cruel and relentless, had entered these beloved walls. An old servant,
who had nursed Idris in infancy, and who lived with us more on the footing of a
revered relative than a domestic, had gone a few days before to visit a
daughter, married, and settled in the neighbourhood of London. On the night of
her return she sickened of the plague. From the haughty and unbending nature of
the Countess of Windsor, Idris had few tender filial associations with her.
This good woman had stood in the place of a mother, and her very deficiencies
of education and knowledge, by rendering her humble and defenceless, endeared
her to us—she was the especial favourite of the children. I found my poor
girl, there is no exaggeration in the expression, wild with grief and dread.
She hung over the patient in agony, which was not mitigated when her thoughts
wandered towards her babes, for whom she feared infection. My arrival was like
the newly discovered lamp of a lighthouse to sailors, who are weathering some
dangerous point. She deposited her appalling doubts in my hands; she relied on
my judgment, and was comforted by my participation in her sorrow. Soon our poor
nurse expired; and the anguish of suspense was changed to deep regret, which
though at first more painful, yet yielded with greater readiness to my
consolations. Sleep, the sovereign balm, at length steeped her tearful eyes in
forgetfulness.


She slept; and quiet prevailed in the Castle, whose inhabitants were hushed to
repose. I was awake, and during the long hours of dead night, my busy thoughts
worked in my brain, like ten thousand mill-wheels, rapid, acute, untameable.
All slept—all England slept; and from my window, commanding a wide
prospect of the star-illumined country, I saw the land stretched out in placid
rest. I was awake, alive, while the brother of death possessed my race. What,
if the more potent of these fraternal deities should obtain dominion over it?
The silence of midnight, to speak truly, though apparently a paradox, rung in
my ears. The solitude became intolerable—I placed my hand on the beating
heart of Idris, I bent my head to catch the sound of her breath, to assure
myself that she still existed—for a moment I doubted whether I should not
awake her; so effeminate an horror ran through my frame.—Great God! would
it one day be thus? One day all extinct, save myself, should I walk the earth
alone? Were these warning voices, whose inarticulate and oracular sense forced
belief upon me?


Yet I would not call them
Voices of warning, that announce to us
Only the inevitable. As the sun,
Ere it is risen, sometimes paints its image
In the atmosphere—so often do the spirits
Of great events stride on before the events,
And in to-day already walks to-morrow.[9]


 [8]
Calderon de la Barca.


 [9]
Coleridge’s Translation of Schiller’s Wallenstein.

</div></body></text></TEI>