<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="6">
CHAPTER IV.

Is there such a feeling as love at first sight? And if there be, in what does
its nature differ from love founded in long observation and slow growth?
Perhaps its effects are not so permanent; but they are, while they last, as
violent and intense. We walk the pathless mazes of society, vacant of joy, till
we hold this clue, leading us through that labyrinth to paradise. Our nature
dim, like to an unlighted torch, sleeps in formless blank till the fire attain
it; this life of life, this light to moon, and glory to the sun. What does it
matter, whether the fire be struck from flint and steel, nourished with care
into a flame, slowly communicated to the dark wick, or whether swiftly the
radiant power of light and warmth passes from a kindred power, and shines at
once the beacon and the hope. In the deepest fountain of my heart the pulses
were stirred; around, above, beneath, the clinging Memory as a cloak enwrapt
me. In no one moment of coming time did I feel as I had done in time gone by.
The spirit of Idris hovered in the air I breathed; her eyes were ever and for
ever bent on mine; her remembered smile blinded my faint gaze, and caused me to
walk as one, not in eclipse, not in darkness and vacancy—but in a new and
brilliant light, too novel, too dazzling for my human senses. On every leaf, on
every small division of the universe, (as on the hyacinth ας is engraved) was
imprinted the talisman of my existence—SHE LIVES! SHE IS! —I had
not time yet to analyze my feeling, to take myself to task, and leash in the
tameless passion; all was one idea, one feeling, one knowledge —it was my
life!


But the die was cast—Raymond would marry Idris. The merry marriage bells
rung in my ears; I heard the nation’s gratulation which followed the
union; the ambitious noble uprose with swift eagle-flight, from the lowly
ground to regal supremacy—and to the love of Idris. Yet, not so! She did
not love him; she had called me her friend; she had smiled on me; to me she had
entrusted her heart’s dearest hope, the welfare of Adrian. This
reflection thawed my congealing blood, and again the tide of life and love
flowed impetuously onward, again to ebb as my busy thoughts changed.


The debate had ended at three in the morning. My soul was in tumults; I
traversed the streets with eager rapidity. Truly, I was mad that night—
love—which I have named a giant from its birth, wrestled with despair! My
heart, the field of combat, was wounded by the iron heel of the one, watered by
the gushing tears of the other. Day, hateful to me, dawned; I retreated to my
lodgings—I threw myself on a couch—I slept—was it
sleep?—for thought was still alive—love and despair struggled
still, and I writhed with unendurable pain.


I awoke half stupefied; I felt a heavy oppression on me, but knew not
wherefore; I entered, as it were, the council-chamber of my brain, and
questioned the various ministers of thought therein assembled; too soon I
remembered all; too soon my limbs quivered beneath the tormenting power; soon,
too soon, I knew myself a slave!


Suddenly, unannounced, Lord Raymond entered my apartment. He came in gaily,
singing the Tyrolese song of liberty; noticed me with a gracious nod, and threw
himself on a sopha opposite the copy of a bust of the Apollo Belvidere. After
one or two trivial remarks, to which I sullenly replied, he suddenly cried,
looking at the bust, “I am called like that victor! Not a bad idea; the
head will serve for my new coinage, and be an omen to all dutiful subjects of
my future success.”


He said this in his most gay, yet benevolent manner, and smiled, not
disdainfully, but in playful mockery of himself. Then his countenance suddenly
darkened, and in that shrill tone peculiar to himself, he cried, “I
fought a good battle last night; higher conquest the plains of Greece never saw
me achieve. Now I am the first man in the state, burthen of every ballad, and
object of old women’s mumbled devotions. What are your meditations? You,
who fancy that you can read the human soul, as your native lake reads each
crevice and folding of its surrounding hills—say what you think of me;
king-expectant, angel or devil, which?”


This ironical tone was discord to my bursting, over-boiling-heart; I was
nettled by his insolence, and replied with bitterness; “There is a
spirit, neither angel or devil, damned to limbo merely.” I saw his cheeks
become pale, and his lips whiten and quiver; his anger served but to enkindle
mine, and I answered with a determined look his eyes which glared on me;
suddenly they were withdrawn, cast down, a tear, I thought, wetted the dark
lashes; I was softened, and with involuntary emotion added, “Not that you
are such, my dear lord.”


I paused, even awed by the agitation he evinced; “Yes,” he said at
length, rising and biting his lip, as he strove to curb his passion;
“Such am I! You do not know me, Verney; neither you, nor our audience of
last night, nor does universal England know aught of me. I stand here, it would
seem, an elected king; this hand is about to grasp a sceptre; these brows feel
in each nerve the coming diadem. I appear to have strength, power, victory;
standing as a dome-supporting column stands; and I am—a reed! I have
ambition, and that attains its aim; my nightly dreams are realized, my waking
hopes fulfilled; a kingdom awaits my acceptance, my enemies are overthrown. But
here,” and he struck his heart with violence, “here is the rebel,
here the stumbling-block; this over-ruling heart, which I may drain of its
living blood; but, while one fluttering pulsation remains, I am its
slave.”


He spoke with a broken voice, then bowed his head, and, hiding his face in his
hands, wept. I was still smarting from my own disappointment; yet this scene
oppressed me even to terror, nor could I interrupt his access of passion. It
subsided at length; and, throwing himself on the couch, he remained silent and
motionless, except that his changeful features shewed a strong internal
conflict. At last he rose, and said in his usual tone of voice, “The time
grows on us, Verney, I must away. Let me not forget my chiefest errand here.
Will you accompany me to Windsor to-morrow? You will not be dishonoured by my
society, and as this is probably the last service, or disservice you can do me,
will you grant my request?”


He held out his hand with almost a bashful air. Swiftly I thought—Yes, I
will witness the last scene of the drama. Beside which, his mien conquered me,
and an affectionate sentiment towards him, again filled my heart—I bade
him command me. “Aye, that I will,” said he gaily,
“that’s my cue now; be with me to-morrow morning by seven; be
secret and faithful; and you shall be groom of the stole ere long.”


So saying, he hastened away, vaulted on his horse, and with a gesture as if he
gave me his hand to kiss, bade me another laughing adieu. Left to myself, I
strove with painful intensity to divine the motive of his request and foresee
the events of the coming day. The hours passed on unperceived; my head ached
with thought, the nerves seemed teeming with the over full fraught—I
clasped my burning brow, as if my fevered hand could medicine its pain. I was
punctual to the appointed hour on the following day, and found Lord Raymond
waiting for me. We got into his carriage, and proceeded towards Windsor. I had
tutored myself, and was resolved by no outward sign to disclose my internal
agitation.


“What a mistake Ryland made,” said Raymond, “when he thought
to overpower me the other night. He spoke well, very well; such an harangue
would have succeeded better addressed to me singly, than to the fools and
knaves assembled yonder. Had I been alone, I should have listened to him with a
wish to hear reason, but when he endeavoured to vanquish me in my own
territory, with my own weapons, he put me on my mettle, and the event was such
as all might have expected.”


I smiled incredulously, and replied: “I am of Ryland’s way of
thinking, and will, if you please, repeat all his arguments; we shall see how
far you will be induced by them, to change the royal for the patriotic
style.”


“The repetition would be useless,” said Raymond, “since I
well remember them, and have many others, self-suggested, which speak with
unanswerable persuasion.”


He did not explain himself, nor did I make any remark on his reply. Our silence
endured for some miles, till the country with open fields, or shady woods and
parks, presented pleasant objects to our view. After some observations on the
scenery and seats, Raymond said: “Philosophers have called man a
microcosm of nature, and find a reflection in the internal mind for all this
machinery visibly at work around us. This theory has often been a source of
amusement to me; and many an idle hour have I spent, exercising my ingenuity in
finding resemblances. Does not Lord Bacon say that, ‘the falling from a
discord to a concord, which maketh great sweetness in music, hath an agreement
with the affections, which are re-integrated to the better after some
dislikes?’ What a sea is the tide of passion, whose fountains are in our
own nature! Our virtues are the quick-sands, which shew themselves at calm and
low water; but let the waves arise and the winds buffet them, and the poor
devil whose hope was in their durability, finds them sink from under him. The
fashions of the world, its exigencies, educations and pursuits, are winds to
drive our wills, like clouds all one way; but let a thunderstorm arise in the
shape of love, hate, or ambition, and the rack goes backward, stemming the
opposing air in triumph.”


“Yet,” replied I, “nature always presents to our eyes the
appearance of a patient: while there is an active principle in man which is
capable of ruling fortune, and at least of tacking against the gale, till it in
some mode conquers it.”


“There is more of what is specious than true in your distinction,”
said my companion. “Did we form ourselves, choosing our dispositions, and
our powers? I find myself, for one, as a stringed instrument with chords and
stops—but I have no power to turn the pegs, or pitch my thoughts to a
higher or lower key.”


“Other men,” I observed, “may be better musicians.”


“I talk not of others, but myself,” replied Raymond, “and I
am as fair an example to go by as another. I cannot set my heart to a
particular tune, or run voluntary changes on my will. We are born; we choose
neither our parents, nor our station; we are educated by others, or by the
world’s circumstance, and this cultivation, mingling with our innate
disposition, is the soil in which our desires, passions, and motives
grow.”


“There is much truth in what you say,” said I, “and yet no
man ever acts upon this theory. Who, when he makes a choice, says, Thus I
choose, because I am necessitated? Does he not on the contrary feel a freedom
of will within him, which, though you may call it fallacious, still actuates
him as he decides?”


“Exactly so,” replied Raymond, “another link of the breakless
chain. Were I now to commit an act which would annihilate my hopes, and pluck
the regal garment from my mortal limbs, to clothe them in ordinary weeds, would
this, think you, be an act of free-will on my part?”


As we talked thus, I perceived that we were not going the ordinary road to
Windsor, but through Englefield Green, towards Bishopgate Heath. I began to
divine that Idris was not the object of our journey, but that I was brought to
witness the scene that was to decide the fate of Raymond—and of Perdita.
Raymond had evidently vacillated during his journey, and irresolution was
marked in every gesture as we entered Perdita’s cottage. I watched him
curiously, determined that, if this hesitation should continue, I would assist
Perdita to overcome herself, and teach her to disdain the wavering love of him,
who balanced between the possession of a crown, and of her, whose excellence
and affection transcended the worth of a kingdom.


We found her in her flower-adorned alcove; she was reading the newspaper report
of the debate in parliament, that apparently doomed her to hopelessness. That
heart-sinking feeling was painted in her sunk eyes and spiritless attitude; a
cloud was on her beauty, and frequent sighs were tokens of her distress. This
sight had an instantaneous effect on Raymond; his eyes beamed with tenderness,
and remorse clothed his manners with earnestness and truth. He sat beside her;
and, taking the paper from her hand, said, “Not a word more shall my
sweet Perdita read of this contention of madmen and fools. I must not permit
you to be acquainted with the extent of my delusion, lest you despise me;
although, believe me, a wish to appear before you, not vanquished, but as a
conqueror, inspired me during my wordy war.”


Perdita looked at him like one amazed; her expressive countenance shone for a
moment with tenderness; to see him only was happiness. But a bitter thought
swiftly shadowed her joy; she bent her eyes on the ground, endeavouring to
master the passion of tears that threatened to overwhelm her. Raymond
continued, “I will not act a part with you, dear girl, or appear other
than what I am, weak and unworthy, more fit to excite your disdain than your
love. Yet you do love me; I feel and know that you do, and thence I draw my
most cherished hopes. If pride guided you, or even reason, you might well
reject me. Do so; if your high heart, incapable of my infirmity of purpose,
refuses to bend to the lowness of mine. Turn from me, if you will,—if you
can. If your whole soul does not urge you to forgive me—if your entire
heart does not open wide its door to admit me to its very centre, forsake me,
never speak to me again. I, though sinning against you almost beyond remission,
I also am proud; there must be no reserve in your pardon—no drawback to
the gift of your affection.”


Perdita looked down, confused, yet pleased. My presence embarrassed her; so
that she dared not turn to meet her lover’s eye, or trust her voice to
assure him of her affection; while a blush mantled her cheek, and her
disconsolate air was exchanged for one expressive of deep-felt joy. Raymond
encircled her waist with his arm, and continued, “I do not deny that I
have balanced between you and the highest hope that mortal men can entertain;
but I do so no longer. Take me—mould me to your will, possess my heart
and soul to all eternity. If you refuse to contribute to my happiness, I quit
England to-night, and will never set foot in it again.


“Lionel, you hear: witness for me: persuade your sister to forgive the
injury I have done her; persuade her to be mine.”


“There needs no persuasion,” said the blushing Perdita,
“except your own dear promises, and my ready heart, which whispers to me
that they are true.”


That same evening we all three walked together in the forest, and, with the
garrulity which happiness inspires, they detailed to me the history of their
loves. It was pleasant to see the haughty Raymond and reserved Perdita changed
through happy love into prattling, playful children, both losing their
characteristic dignity in the fulness of mutual contentment. A night or two ago
Lord Raymond, with a brow of care, and a heart oppressed with thought, bent all
his energies to silence or persuade the legislators of England that a sceptre
was not too weighty for his hand, while visions of dominion, war, and triumph
floated before him; now, frolicsome as a lively boy sporting under his
mother’s approving eye, the hopes of his ambition were complete, when he
pressed the small fair hand of Perdita to his lips; while she, radiant with
delight, looked on the still pool, not truly admiring herself, but drinking in
with rapture the reflection there made of the form of herself and her lover,
shewn for the first time in dear conjunction.


I rambled away from them. If the rapture of assured sympathy was theirs, I
enjoyed that of restored hope. I looked on the regal towers of Windsor. High is
the wall and strong the barrier that separate me from my Star of Beauty. But
not impassible. She will not be his. A few more years dwell in thy native
garden, sweet flower, till I by toil and time acquire a right to gather thee.
Despair not, nor bid me despair! What must I do now? First I must seek Adrian,
and restore him to her. Patience, gentleness, and untired affection, shall
recall him, if it be true, as Raymond says, that he is mad; energy and courage
shall rescue him, if he be unjustly imprisoned.


After the lovers again joined me, we supped together in the alcove. Truly it
was a fairy’s supper; for though the air was perfumed by the scent of
fruits and wine, we none of us either ate or drank—even the beauty of the
night was unobserved; their extasy could not be increased by outward objects,
and I was wrapt in reverie. At about midnight Raymond and I took leave of my
sister, to return to town. He was all gaiety; scraps of songs fell from his
lips; every thought of his mind—every object about us, gleamed under the
sunshine of his mirth. He accused me of melancholy, of ill-humour and envy.


“Not so,” said I, “though I confess that my thoughts are not
occupied as pleasantly as yours are. You promised to facilitate my visit to
Adrian; I conjure you to perform your promise. I cannot linger here; I long to
soothe —perhaps to cure the malady of my first and best friend. I shall
immediately depart for Dunkeld.”


“Thou bird of night,” replied Raymond, “what an eclipse do
you throw across my bright thoughts, forcing me to call to mind that melancholy
ruin, which stands in mental desolation, more irreparable than a fragment of a
carved column in a weed-grown field. You dream that you can restore him?
Daedalus never wound so inextricable an error round Minotaur, as madness has
woven about his imprisoned reason. Nor you, nor any other Theseus, can thread
the labyrinth, to which perhaps some unkind Ariadne has the clue.”


“You allude to Evadne Zaimi: but she is not in England.”


“And were she,” said Raymond, “I would not advise her seeing
him. Better to decay in absolute delirium, than to be the victim of the
methodical unreason of ill-bestowed love. The long duration of his malady has
probably erased from his mind all vestige of her; and it were well that it
should never again be imprinted. You will find him at Dunkeld; gentle and
tractable he wanders up the hills, and through the wood, or sits listening
beside the waterfall. You may see him—his hair stuck with wild flowers
—his eyes full of untraceable meaning—his voice broken—his
person wasted to a shadow. He plucks flowers and weeds, and weaves chaplets of
them, or sails yellow leaves and bits of bark on the stream, rejoicing in their
safety, or weeping at their wreck. The very memory half unmans me. By Heaven!
the first tears I have shed since boyhood rushed scalding into my eyes when I
saw him.”


It needed not this last account to spur me on to visit him. I only doubted
whether or not I should endeavour to see Idris again, before I departed. This
doubt was decided on the following day. Early in the morning Raymond came to
me; intelligence had arrived that Adrian was dangerously ill, and it appeared
impossible that his failing strength should surmount the disorder.
“To-morrow,” said Raymond, “his mother and sister set out for
Scotland to see him once again.”


“And I go to-day,” I cried; “this very hour I will engage a
sailing balloon; I shall be there in forty-eight hours at furthest, perhaps in
less, if the wind is fair. Farewell, Raymond; be happy in having chosen the
better part in life. This turn of fortune revives me. I feared madness, not
sickness—I have a presentiment that Adrian will not die; perhaps this
illness is a crisis, and he may recover.”


Everything favoured my journey. The balloon rose about half a mile from the
earth, and with a favourable wind it hurried through the air, its feathered
vans cleaving the unopposing atmosphere. Notwithstanding the melancholy object
of my journey, my spirits were exhilarated by reviving hope, by the swift
motion of the airy pinnace, and the balmy visitation of the sunny air. The
pilot hardly moved the plumed steerage, and the slender mechanism of the wings,
wide unfurled, gave forth a murmuring noise, soothing to the sense. Plain and
hill, stream and corn-field, were discernible below, while we unimpeded sped on
swift and secure, as a wild swan in his spring-tide flight. The machine obeyed
the slightest motion of the helm; and, the wind blowing steadily, there was no
let or obstacle to our course. Such was the power of man over the elements; a
power long sought, and lately won; yet foretold in by-gone time by the prince
of poets, whose verses I quoted much to the astonishment of my pilot, when I
told him how many hundred years ago they had been written:—


Oh! human wit, thou can’st invent much ill,
Thou searchest strange arts: who would think by skill,
An heavy man like a light bird should stray,
And through the empty heavens find a way?


I alighted at Perth; and, though much fatigued by a constant exposure to the
air for many hours, I would not rest, but merely altering my mode of
conveyance, I went by land instead of air, to Dunkeld. The sun was rising as I
entered the opening of the hills. After the revolution of ages Birnam hill was
again covered with a young forest, while more aged pines, planted at the very
commencement of the nineteenth century by the then Duke of Athol, gave
solemnity and beauty to the scene. The rising sun first tinged the pine tops;
and my mind, rendered through my mountain education deeply susceptible of the
graces of nature, and now on the eve of again beholding my beloved and perhaps
dying friend, was strangely influenced by the sight of those distant beams:
surely they were ominous, and as such I regarded them, good omens for Adrian,
on whose life my happiness depended.


Poor fellow! he lay stretched on a bed of sickness, his cheeks glowing with the
hues of fever, his eyes half closed, his breath irregular and difficult. Yet it
was less painful to see him thus, than to find him fulfilling the animal
functions uninterruptedly, his mind sick the while. I established myself at his
bedside; I never quitted it day or night. Bitter task was it, to behold his
spirit waver between death and life: to see his warm cheek, and know that the
very fire which burned too fiercely there, was consuming the vital fuel; to
hear his moaning voice, which might never again articulate words of love and
wisdom; to witness the ineffectual motions of his limbs, soon to be wrapt in
their mortal shroud. Such for three days and nights appeared the consummation
which fate had decreed for my labours, and I became haggard and spectre-like,
through anxiety and watching. At length his eyes unclosed faintly, yet with a
look of returning life; he became pale and weak; but the rigidity of his
features was softened by approaching convalescence. He knew me. What a brimful
cup of joyful agony it was, when his face first gleamed with the glance of
recognition—when he pressed my hand, now more fevered than his own, and
when he pronounced my name! No trace of his past insanity remained, to dash my
joy with sorrow.


This same evening his mother and sister arrived. The Countess of Windsor was by
nature full of energetic feeling; but she had very seldom in her life permitted
the concentrated emotions of her heart to shew themselves on her features. The
studied immovability of her countenance; her slow, equable manner, and soft but
unmelodious voice, were a mask, hiding her fiery passions, and the impatience
of her disposition. She did not in the least resemble either of her children;
her black and sparkling eye, lit up by pride, was totally unlike the blue
lustre, and frank, benignant expression of either Adrian or Idris. There was
something grand and majestic in her motions, but nothing persuasive, nothing
amiable. Tall, thin, and strait, her face still handsome, her raven hair hardly
tinged with grey, her forehead arched and beautiful, had not the eye-brows been
somewhat scattered—it was impossible not to be struck by her, almost to
fear her. Idris appeared to be the only being who could resist her mother,
notwithstanding the extreme mildness of her character. But there was a
fearlessness and frankness about her, which said that she would not encroach on
another’s liberty, but held her own sacred and unassailable.


The Countess cast no look of kindness on my worn-out frame, though afterwards
she thanked me coldly for my attentions. Not so Idris; her first glance was for
her brother; she took his hand, she kissed his eye-lids, and hung over him with
looks of compassion and love. Her eyes glistened with tears when she thanked
me, and the grace of her expressions was enhanced, not diminished, by the
fervour, which caused her almost to falter as she spoke. Her mother, all eyes
and ears, soon interrupted us; and I saw, that she wished to dismiss me
quietly, as one whose services, now that his relatives had arrived, were of no
use to her son. I was harassed and ill, resolved not to give up my post, yet
doubting in what way I should assert it; when Adrian called me, and clasping my
hand, bade me not leave him. His mother, apparently inattentive, at once
understood what was meant, and seeing the hold we had upon her, yielded the
point to us.


The days that followed were full of pain to me; so that I sometimes regretted
that I had not yielded at once to the haughty lady, who watched all my motions,
and turned my beloved task of nursing my friend to a work of pain and
irritation. Never did any woman appear so entirely made of mind, as the
Countess of Windsor. Her passions had subdued her appetites, even her natural
wants; she slept little, and hardly ate at all; her body was evidently
considered by her as a mere machine, whose health was necessary for the
accomplishment of her schemes, but whose senses formed no part of her
enjoyment. There is something fearful in one who can thus conquer the animal
part of our nature, if the victory be not the effect of consummate virtue; nor
was it without a mixture of this feeling, that I beheld the figure of the
Countess awake when others slept, fasting when I, abstemious naturally, and
rendered so by the fever that preyed on me, was forced to recruit myself with
food. She resolved to prevent or diminish my opportunities of acquiring
influence over her children, and circumvented my plans by a hard, quiet,
stubborn resolution, that seemed not to belong to flesh and blood. War was at
last tacitly acknowledged between us. We had many pitched battles, during which
no word was spoken, hardly a look was interchanged, but in which each resolved
not to submit to the other. The Countess had the advantage of position; so I
was vanquished, though I would not yield.


I became sick at heart. My countenance was painted with the hues of ill health
and vexation. Adrian and Idris saw this; they attributed it to my long watching
and anxiety; they urged me to rest, and take care of myself, while I most truly
assured them, that my best medicine was their good wishes; those, and the
assured convalescence of my friend, now daily more apparent. The faint rose
again blushed on his cheek; his brow and lips lost the ashy paleness of
threatened dissolution; such was the dear reward of my unremitting
attention—and bounteous heaven added overflowing recompence, when it gave
me also the thanks and smiles of Idris.


After the lapse of a few weeks, we left Dunkeld. Idris and her mother returned
immediately to Windsor, while Adrian and I followed by slow journies and
frequent stoppages, occasioned by his continued weakness. As we traversed the
various counties of fertile England, all wore an exhilarating appearance to my
companion, who had been so long secluded by disease from the enjoyments of
weather and scenery. We passed through busy towns and cultivated plains. The
husbandmen were getting in their plenteous harvests, and the women and
children, occupied by light rustic toils, formed groupes of happy, healthful
persons, the very sight of whom carried cheerfulness to the heart. One evening,
quitting our inn, we strolled down a shady lane, then up a grassy slope, till
we came to an eminence, that commanded an extensive view of hill and dale,
meandering rivers, dark woods, and shining villages. The sun was setting; and
the clouds, straying, like new-shorn sheep, through the vast fields of sky,
received the golden colour of his parting beams; the distant uplands shone out,
and the busy hum of evening came, harmonized by distance, on our ear. Adrian,
who felt all the fresh spirit infused by returning health, clasped his hands in
delight, and exclaimed with transport:


“O happy earth, and happy inhabitants of earth! A stately palace has God
built for you, O man! and worthy are you of your dwelling! Behold the verdant
carpet spread at our feet, and the azure canopy above; the fields of earth
which generate and nurture all things, and the track of heaven, which contains
and clasps all things. Now, at this evening hour, at the period of repose and
refection, methinks all hearts breathe one hymn of love and thanksgiving, and
we, like priests of old on the mountain-tops, give a voice to their sentiment.


“Assuredly a most benignant power built up the majestic fabric we
inhabit, and framed the laws by which it endures. If mere existence, and not
happiness, had been the final end of our being, what need of the profuse
luxuries which we enjoy? Why should our dwelling place be so lovely, and why
should the instincts of nature minister pleasurable sensations? The very
sustaining of our animal machine is made delightful; and our sustenance, the
fruits of the field, is painted with transcendant hues, endued with grateful
odours, and palatable to our taste. Why should this be, if HE were not good? We
need houses to protect us from the seasons, and behold the materials with which
we are provided; the growth of trees with their adornment of leaves; while
rocks of stone piled above the plains variegate the prospect with their
pleasant irregularity.


“Nor are outward objects alone the receptacles of the Spirit of Good.
Look into the mind of man, where wisdom reigns enthroned; where imagination,
the painter, sits, with his pencil dipt in hues lovelier than those of sunset,
adorning familiar life with glowing tints. What a noble boon, worthy the giver,
is the imagination! it takes from reality its leaden hue: it envelopes all
thought and sensation in a radiant veil, and with an hand of beauty beckons us
from the sterile seas of life, to her gardens, and bowers, and glades of bliss.
And is not love a gift of the divinity? Love, and her child, Hope, which can
bestow wealth on poverty, strength on the weak, and happiness on the sorrowing.


“My lot has not been fortunate. I have consorted long with grief, entered
the gloomy labyrinth of madness, and emerged, but half alive. Yet I thank God
that I have lived! I thank God, that I have beheld his throne, the heavens, and
earth, his footstool. I am glad that I have seen the changes of his day; to
behold the sun, fountain of light, and the gentle pilgrim moon; to have seen
the fire bearing flowers of the sky, and the flowery stars of earth; to have
witnessed the sowing and the harvest. I am glad that I have loved, and have
experienced sympathetic joy and sorrow with my fellow-creatures. I am glad now
to feel the current of thought flow through my mind, as the blood through the
articulations of my frame; mere existence is pleasure; and I thank God that I
live!


“And all ye happy nurslings of mother-earth, do ye not echo my words? Ye
who are linked by the affectionate ties of nature, companions, friends, lovers!
fathers, who toil with joy for their offspring; women, who while gazing on the
living forms of their children, forget the pains of maternity; children, who
neither toil nor spin, but love and are loved!


“Oh, that death and sickness were banished from our earthly home! that
hatred, tyranny, and fear could no longer make their lair in the human heart!
that each man might find a brother in his fellow, and a nest of repose amid the
wide plains of his inheritance! that the source of tears were dry, and that
lips might no longer form expressions of sorrow. Sleeping thus under the
beneficent eye of heaven, can evil visit thee, O Earth, or grief cradle to
their graves thy luckless children? Whisper it not, let the demons hear and
rejoice! The choice is with us; let us will it, and our habitation becomes a
paradise. For the will of man is omnipotent, blunting the arrows of death,
soothing the bed of disease, and wiping away the tears of agony. And what is
each human being worth, if he do not put forth his strength to aid his
fellow-creatures? My soul is a fading spark, my nature frail as a spent wave;
but I dedicate all of intellect and strength that remains to me, to that one
work, and take upon me the task, as far as I am able, of bestowing blessings on
my fellow-men!”


His voice trembled, his eyes were cast up, his hands clasped, and his fragile
person was bent, as it were, with excess of emotion. The spirit of life seemed
to linger in his form, as a dying flame on an altar flickers on the embers of
an accepted sacrifice.

</div></body></text></TEI>