<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="17">
CHAPTER IV.

I returned to my family estate in the autumn of the year 2092. My heart had
long been with them; and I felt sick with the hope and delight of seeing them
again. The district which contained them appeared the abode of every kindly
spirit. Happiness, love and peace, walked the forest paths, and tempered the
atmosphere. After all the agitation and sorrow I had endured in Greece, I
sought Windsor, as the storm-driven bird does the nest in which it may fold its
wings in tranquillity.


How unwise had the wanderers been, who had deserted its shelter, entangled
themselves in the web of society, and entered on what men of the world call
“life,”—that labyrinth of evil, that scheme of mutual
torture. To live, according to this sense of the word, we must not only observe
and learn, we must also feel; we must not be mere spectators of action, we must
act; we must not describe, but be subjects of description. Deep sorrow must
have been the inmate of our bosoms; fraud must have lain in wait for us; the
artful must have deceived us; sickening doubt and false hope must have
chequered our days; hilarity and joy, that lap the soul in ecstasy, must at
times have possessed us. Who that knows what “life” is, would pine
for this feverish species of existence? I have lived. I have spent days and
nights of festivity; I have joined in ambitious hopes, and exulted in victory:
now,—shut the door on the world, and build high the wall that is to
separate me from the troubled scene enacted within its precincts. Let us live
for each other and for happiness; let us seek peace in our dear home, near the
inland murmur of streams, and the gracious waving of trees, the beauteous
vesture of earth, and sublime pageantry of the skies. Let us leave
“life,” that we may live.


Idris was well content with this resolve of mine. Her native sprightliness
needed no undue excitement, and her placid heart reposed contented on my love,
the well-being of her children, and the beauty of surrounding nature. Her pride
and blameless ambition was to create smiles in all around her, and to shed
repose on the fragile existence of her brother. In spite of her tender nursing,
the health of Adrian perceptibly declined. Walking, riding, the common
occupations of life, overcame him: he felt no pain, but seemed to tremble for
ever on the verge of annihilation. Yet, as he had lived on for months nearly in
the same state, he did not inspire us with any immediate fear; and, though he
talked of death as an event most familiar to his thoughts, he did not cease to
exert himself to render others happy, or to cultivate his own astonishing
powers of mind. Winter passed away; and spring, led by the months, awakened
life in all nature. The forest was dressed in green; the young calves frisked
on the new-sprung grass; the wind-winged shadows of light clouds sped over the
green cornfields; the hermit cuckoo repeated his monotonous all-hail to the
season; the nightingale, bird of love and minion of the evening star, filled
the woods with song; while Venus lingered in the warm sunset, and the young
green of the trees lay in gentle relief along the clear horizon.


Delight awoke in every heart, delight and exultation; for there was peace
through all the world; the temple of Universal Janus was shut, and man died not
that year by the hand of man.


“Let this last but twelve months,” said Adrian; “and earth
will become a Paradise. The energies of man were before directed to the
destruction of his species: they now aim at its liberation and preservation.
Man cannot repose, and his restless aspirations will now bring forth good
instead of evil. The favoured countries of the south will throw off the iron
yoke of servitude; poverty will quit us, and with that, sickness. What may not
the forces, never before united, of liberty and peace achieve in this dwelling
of man?”


“Dreaming, for ever dreaming, Windsor!” said Ryland, the old
adversary of Raymond, and candidate for the Protectorate at the ensuing
election. “Be assured that earth is not, nor ever can be heaven, while
the seeds of hell are natives of her soil. When the seasons have become equal,
when the air breeds no disorders, when its surface is no longer liable to
blights and droughts, then sickness will cease; when men’s passions are
dead, poverty will depart. When love is no longer akin to hate, then
brotherhood will exist: we are very far from that state at present.”


“Not so far as you may suppose,” observed a little old astronomer,
by name Merrival, “the poles precede slowly, but securely; in an hundred
thousand years—”


“We shall all be underground,” said Ryland.


“The pole of the earth will coincide with the pole of the
ecliptic,” continued the astronomer, “an universal spring will be
produced, and earth become a paradise.”


“And we shall of course enjoy the benefit of the change,” said
Ryland, contemptuously.


“We have strange news here,” I observed. I had the newspaper in my
hand, and, as usual, had turned to the intelligence from Greece. “It
seems that the total destruction of Constantinople, and the supposition that
winter had purified the air of the fallen city, gave the Greeks courage to
visit its site, and begin to rebuild it. But they tell us that the curse of God
is on the place, for every one who has ventured within the walls has been
tainted by the plague; that this disease has spread in Thrace and Macedonia;
and now, fearing the virulence of infection during the coming heats, a cordon
has been drawn on the frontiers of Thessaly, and a strict quarantine
exacted.” This intelligence brought us back from the prospect of
paradise, held out after the lapse of an hundred thousand years, to the pain
and misery at present existent upon earth. We talked of the ravages made last
year by pestilence in every quarter of the world; and of the dreadful
consequences of a second visitation. We discussed the best means of preventing
infection, and of preserving health and activity in a large city thus
afflicted—London, for instance. Merrival did not join in this
conversation; drawing near Idris, he proceeded to assure her that the joyful
prospect of an earthly paradise after an hundred thousand years, was clouded to
him by the knowledge that in a certain period of time after, an earthly hell or
purgatory, would occur, when the ecliptic and equator would be at right
angles.[4] Our party at length
broke up; “We are all dreaming this morning,” said Ryland,
“it is as wise to discuss the probability of a visitation of the plague
in our well-governed metropolis, as to calculate the centuries which must
escape before we can grow pine-apples here in the open air.”


But, though it seemed absurd to calculate upon the arrival of the plague in
London, I could not reflect without extreme pain on the desolation this evil
would cause in Greece. The English for the most part talked of Thrace and
Macedonia, as they would of a lunar territory, which, unknown to them,
presented no distinct idea or interest to the minds. I had trod the soil. The
faces of many of the inhabitants were familiar to me; in the towns, plains,
hills, and defiles of these countries, I had enjoyed unspeakable delight, as I
journied through them the year before. Some romantic village, some cottage, or
elegant abode there situated, inhabited by the lovely and the good, rose before
my mental sight, and the question haunted me, is the plague there
also?—That same invincible monster, which hovered over and devoured
Constantinople—that fiend more cruel than tempest, less tame than fire,
is, alas, unchained in that beautiful country—these reflections would not
allow me to rest.


The political state of England became agitated as the time drew near when the
new Protector was to be elected. This event excited the more interest, since it
was the current report, that if the popular candidate (Ryland) should be
chosen, the question of the abolition of hereditary rank, and other feudal
relics, would come under the consideration of parliament. Not a word had been
spoken during the present session on any of these topics. Every thing would
depend upon the choice of a Protector, and the elections of the ensuing year.
Yet this very silence was awful, shewing the deep weight attributed to the
question; the fear of either party to hazard an ill-timed attack, and the
expectation of a furious contention when it should begin.


But although St. Stephen’s did not echo with the voice which filled each
heart, the newspapers teemed with nothing else; and in private companies the
conversation however remotely begun, soon verged towards this central point,
while voices were lowered and chairs drawn closer. The nobles did not hesitate
to express their fear; the other party endeavoured to treat the matter lightly.
“Shame on the country,” said Ryland, “to lay so much stress
upon words and frippery; it is a question of nothing; of the new painting of
carriage-pannels and the embroidery of footmen’s coats.”


Yet could England indeed doff her lordly trappings, and be content with the
democratic style of America? Were the pride of ancestry, the patrician spirit,
the gentle courtesies and refined pursuits, splendid attributes of rank, to be
erased among us? We were told that this would not be the case; that we were by
nature a poetical people, a nation easily duped by words, ready to array clouds
in splendour, and bestow honour on the dust. This spirit we could never lose;
and it was to diffuse this concentrated spirit of birth, that the new law was
to be brought forward. We were assured that, when the name and title of
Englishman was the sole patent of nobility, we should all be noble; that when
no man born under English sway, felt another his superior in rank, courtesy and
refinement would become the birth-right of all our countrymen. Let not England
be so far disgraced, as to have it imagined that it can be without nobles,
nature’s true nobility, who bear their patent in their mien, who are from
their cradle elevated above the rest of their species, because they are better
than the rest. Among a race of independent, and generous, and well educated
men, in a country where the imagination is empress of men’s minds, there
needs be no fear that we should want a perpetual succession of the high-born
and lordly. That party, however, could hardly yet be considered a minority in
the kingdom, who extolled the ornament of the column, “the Corinthian
capital of polished society;” they appealed to prejudices without number,
to old attachments and young hopes; to the expectation of thousands who might
one day become peers; they set up as a scarecrow, the spectre of all that was
sordid, mechanic and base in the commercial republics.


The plague had come to Athens. Hundreds of English residents returned to their
own country. Raymond’s beloved Athenians, the free, the noble people of
the divinest town in Greece, fell like ripe corn before the merciless sickle of
the adversary. Its pleasant places were deserted; its temples and palaces were
converted into tombs; its energies, bent before towards the highest objects of
human ambition, were now forced to converge to one point, the guarding against
the innumerous arrows of the plague.


At any other time this disaster would have excited extreme compassion among us;
but it was now passed over, while each mind was engaged by the coming
controversy. It was not so with me; and the question of rank and right dwindled
to insignificance in my eyes, when I pictured the scene of suffering Athens. I
heard of the death of only sons; of wives and husbands most devoted; of the
rending of ties twisted with the heart’s fibres, of friend losing friend,
and young mothers mourning for their first born; and these moving incidents
were grouped and painted in my mind by the knowledge of the persons, by my
esteem and affection for the sufferers. It was the admirers, friends, fellow
soldiers of Raymond, families that had welcomed Perdita to Greece, and lamented
with her the loss of her lord, that were swept away, and went to dwell with
them in the undistinguishing tomb.


The plague at Athens had been preceded and caused by the contagion from the
East; and the scene of havoc and death continued to be acted there, on a scale
of fearful magnitude. A hope that the visitation of the present year would
prove the last, kept up the spirits of the merchants connected with these
countries; but the inhabitants were driven to despair, or to a resignation
which, arising from fanaticism, assumed the same dark hue. America had also
received the taint; and, were it yellow fever or plague, the epidemic was
gifted with a virulence before unfelt. The devastation was not confined to the
towns, but spread throughout the country; the hunter died in the woods, the
peasant in the corn-fields, and the fisher on his native waters.


A strange story was brought to us from the East, to which little credit would
have been given, had not the fact been attested by a multitude of witnesses, in
various parts of the world. On the twenty-first of June, it was said that an
hour before noon, a black sun arose: an orb, the size of that luminary, but
dark, defined, whose beams were shadows, ascended from the west; in about an
hour it had reached the meridian, and eclipsed the bright parent of day. Night
fell upon every country, night, sudden, rayless, entire. The stars came out,
shedding their ineffectual glimmerings on the light-widowed earth. But soon the
dim orb passed from over the sun, and lingered down the eastern heaven. As it
descended, its dusky rays crossed the brilliant ones of the sun, and deadened
or distorted them. The shadows of things assumed strange and ghastly shapes.
The wild animals in the woods took fright at the unknown shapes figured on the
ground. They fled they knew not whither; and the citizens were filled with
greater dread, at the convulsion which “shook lions into civil
streets;”—birds, strong-winged eagles, suddenly blinded, fell in
the market-places, while owls and bats shewed themselves welcoming the early
night. Gradually the object of fear sank beneath the horizon, and to the last
shot up shadowy beams into the otherwise radiant air. Such was the tale sent us
from Asia, from the eastern extremity of Europe, and from Africa as far west as
the Golden Coast. Whether this story were true or not, the effects were
certain. Through Asia, from the banks of the Nile to the shores of the Caspian,
from the Hellespont even to the sea of Oman, a sudden panic was driven. The men
filled the mosques; the women, veiled, hastened to the tombs, and carried
offerings to the dead, thus to preserve the living. The plague was forgotten,
in this new fear which the black sun had spread; and, though the dead
multiplied, and the streets of Ispahan, of Pekin, and of Delhi were strewed
with pestilence-struck corpses, men passed on, gazing on the ominous sky,
regardless of the death beneath their feet. The christians sought their
churches,—christian maidens, even at the feast of roses, clad in white,
with shining veils, sought, in long procession, the places consecrated to their
religion, filling the air with their hymns; while, ever and anon, from the lips
of some poor mourner in the crowd, a voice of wailing burst, and the rest
looked up, fancying they could discern the sweeping wings of angels, who passed
over the earth, lamenting the disasters about to fall on man.


In the sunny clime of Persia, in the crowded cities of China, amidst the
aromatic groves of Cashmere, and along the southern shores of the
Mediterranean, such scenes had place. Even in Greece the tale of the sun of
darkness encreased the fears and despair of the dying multitude. We, in our
cloudy isle, were far removed from danger, and the only circumstance that
brought these disasters at all home to us, was the daily arrival of vessels
from the east, crowded with emigrants, mostly English; for the Moslems, though
the fear of death was spread keenly among them, still clung together; that, if
they were to die (and if they were, death would as readily meet them on the
homeless sea, or in far England, as in Persia,)— if they were to die,
their bones might rest in earth made sacred by the relics of true believers.
Mecca had never before been so crowded with pilgrims; yet the Arabs neglected
to pillage the caravans, but, humble and weaponless, they joined the
procession, praying Mahomet to avert plague from their tents and deserts.


I cannot describe the rapturous delight with which I turned from political
brawls at home, and the physical evils of distant countries, to my own dear
home, to the selected abode of goodness and love; to peace, and the interchange
of every sacred sympathy. Had I never quitted Windsor, these emotions would not
have been so intense; but I had in Greece been the prey of fear and deplorable
change; in Greece, after a period of anxiety and sorrow, I had seen depart two,
whose very names were the symbol of greatness and virtue. But such miseries
could never intrude upon the domestic circle left to me, while, secluded in our
beloved forest, we passed our lives in tranquillity. Some small change indeed
the progress of years brought here; and time, as it is wont, stamped the traces
of mortality on our pleasures and expectations. Idris, the most affectionate
wife, sister and friend, was a tender and loving mother. The feeling was not
with her as with many, a pastime; it was a passion. We had had three children;
one, the second in age, died while I was in Greece. This had dashed the
triumphant and rapturous emotions of maternity with grief and fear. Before this
event, the little beings, sprung from herself, the young heirs of her transient
life, seemed to have a sure lease of existence; now she dreaded that the
pitiless destroyer might snatch her remaining darlings, as it had snatched
their brother. The least illness caused throes of terror; she was miserable if
she were at all absent from them; her treasure of happiness she had garnered in
their fragile being, and kept forever on the watch, lest the insidious thief
should as before steal these valued gems. She had fortunately small cause for
fear. Alfred, now nine years old, was an upright, manly little fellow, with
radiant brow, soft eyes, and gentle, though independent disposition. Our
youngest was yet in infancy; but his downy cheek was sprinkled with the roses
of health, and his unwearied vivacity filled our halls with innocent laughter.


Clara had passed the age which, from its mute ignorance, was the source of the
fears of Idris. Clara was dear to her, to all. There was so much intelligence
combined with innocence, sensibility with forbearance, and seriousness with
perfect good-humour, a beauty so transcendant, united to such endearing
simplicity, that she hung like a pearl in the shrine of our possessions, a
treasure of wonder and excellence.


At the beginning of winter our Alfred, now nine years of age, first went to
school at Eton. This appeared to him the primary step towards manhood, and he
was proportionably pleased. Community of study and amusement developed the best
parts of his character, his steady perseverance, generosity, and well-governed
firmness. What deep and sacred emotions are excited in a father’s bosom,
when he first becomes convinced that his love for his child is not a mere
instinct, but worthily bestowed, and that others, less akin, participate his
approbation! It was supreme happiness to Idris and myself, to find that the
frankness which Alfred’s open brow indicated, the intelligence of his
eyes, the tempered sensibility of his tones, were not delusions, but
indications of talents and virtues, which would “grow with his growth,
and strengthen with his strength.” At this period, the termination of an
animal’s love for its offspring,—the true affection of the human
parent commences. We no longer look on this dearest part of ourselves, as a
tender plant which we must cherish, or a plaything for an idle hour. We build
now on his intellectual faculties, we establish our hopes on his moral
propensities. His weakness still imparts anxiety to this feeling, his ignorance
prevents entire intimacy; but we begin to respect the future man, and to
endeavour to secure his esteem, even as if he were our equal. What can a parent
have more at heart than the good opinion of his child? In all our transactions
with him our honour must be inviolate, the integrity of our relations
untainted: fate and circumstance may, when he arrives at maturity, separate us
for ever—but, as his aegis in danger, his consolation in hardship, let
the ardent youth for ever bear with him through the rough path of life, love
and honour for his parents.


We had lived so long in the vicinity of Eton, that its population of young
folks was well known to us. Many of them had been Alfred’s playmates,
before they became his school-fellows. We now watched this youthful
congregation with redoubled interest. We marked the difference of character
among the boys, and endeavoured to read the future man in the stripling. There
is nothing more lovely, to which the heart more yearns than a free-spirited
boy, gentle, brave, and generous. Several of the Etonians had these
characteristics; all were distinguished by a sense of honour, and spirit of
enterprize; in some, as they verged towards manhood, this degenerated into
presumption; but the younger ones, lads a little older than our own, were
conspicuous for their gallant and sweet dispositions.


Here were the future governors of England; the men, who, when our ardour was
cold, and our projects completed or destroyed for ever, when, our drama acted,
we doffed the garb of the hour, and assumed the uniform of age, or of more
equalizing death; here were the beings who were to carry on the vast machine of
society; here were the lovers, husbands, fathers; here the landlord, the
politician, the soldier; some fancied that they were even now ready to appear
on the stage, eager to make one among the dramatis personae of active life. It
was not long since I was like one of these beardless aspirants; when my boy
shall have obtained the place I now hold, I shall have tottered into a
grey-headed, wrinkled old man. Strange system! riddle of the Sphynx, most
awe-striking! that thus man remains, while we the individuals pass away. Such
is, to borrow the words of an eloquent and philosophic writer, “the mode
of existence decreed to a permanent body composed of transitory parts; wherein,
by the disposition of a stupendous wisdom, moulding together the great
mysterious incorporation of the human race, the whole, at one time, is never
old, or middle-aged, or young, but, in a condition of unchangeable constancy,
moves on through the varied tenour of perpetual decay, fall, renovation, and
progression.”[5]


Willingly do I give place to thee, dear Alfred! advance, offspring of tender
love, child of our hopes; advance a soldier on the road to which I have been
the pioneer! I will make way for thee. I have already put off the carelessness
of childhood, the unlined brow, and springy gait of early years, that they may
adorn thee. Advance; and I will despoil myself still further for thy advantage.
Time shall rob me of the graces of maturity, shall take the fire from my eyes,
and agility from my limbs, shall steal the better part of life, eager
expectation and passionate love, and shower them in double portion on thy dear
head. Advance! avail thyself of the gift, thou and thy comrades; and in the
drama you are about to act, do not disgrace those who taught you to enter on
the stage, and to pronounce becomingly the parts assigned to you! May your
progress be uninterrupted and secure; born during the spring-tide of the hopes
of man, may you lead up the summer to which no winter may succeed!


 [4]
See an ingenious Essay, entitled, “The Mythological Astronomy of the
Ancients Demonstrated,” by Mackey, a shoemaker, of Norwich printed in
1822.


 [5]
Burke’s Reflections on the French Revolution.

</div></body></text></TEI>