<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="7">
CHAPTER V.

When we arrived at Windsor, I found that Raymond and Perdita had departed for
the continent. I took possession of my sister’s cottage, and blessed
myself that I lived within view of Windsor Castle. It was a curious fact, that
at this period, when by the marriage of Perdita I was allied to one of the
richest individuals in England, and was bound by the most intimate friendship
to its chiefest noble, I experienced the greatest excess of poverty that I had
ever known. My knowledge of the worldly principles of Lord Raymond, would have
ever prevented me from applying to him, however deep my distress might have
been. It was in vain that I repeated to myself with regard to Adrian, that his
purse was open to me; that one in soul, as we were, our fortunes ought also to
be common. I could never, while with him, think of his bounty as a remedy to my
poverty; and I even put aside hastily his offers of supplies, assuring him of a
falsehood, that I needed them not. How could I say to this generous being,
“Maintain me in idleness. You who have dedicated your powers of mind and
fortune to the benefit of your species, shall you so misdirect your exertions,
as to support in uselessness the strong, healthy, and capable?”


And yet I dared not request him to use his influence that I might obtain an
honourable provision for myself—for then I should have been obliged to
leave Windsor. I hovered for ever around the walls of its Castle, beneath its
enshadowing thickets; my sole companions were my books and my loving thoughts.
I studied the wisdom of the ancients, and gazed on the happy walls that
sheltered the beloved of my soul. My mind was nevertheless idle. I pored over
the poetry of old times; I studied the metaphysics of Plato and Berkeley. I
read the histories of Greece and Rome, and of England’s former periods,
and I watched the movements of the lady of my heart. At night I could see her
shadow on the walls of her apartment; by day I viewed her in her flower-garden,
or riding in the park with her usual companions. Methought the charm would be
broken if I were seen, but I heard the music of her voice and was happy. I gave
to each heroine of whom I read, her beauty and matchless excellences—such
was Antigone, when she guided the blind Œdipus to the grove of the Eumenides,
and discharged the funeral rites of Polynices; such was Miranda in the
unvisited cave of Prospero; such Haidee, on the sands of the Ionian island. I
was mad with excess of passionate devotion; but pride, tameless as fire,
invested my nature, and prevented me from betraying myself by word or look.


In the mean time, while I thus pampered myself with rich mental repasts, a
peasant would have disdained my scanty fare, which I sometimes robbed from the
squirrels of the forest. I was, I own, often tempted to recur to the lawless
feats of my boy-hood, and knock down the almost tame pheasants that perched
upon the trees, and bent their bright eyes on me. But they were the property of
Adrian, the nurslings of Idris; and so, although my imagination rendered
sensual by privation, made me think that they would better become the spit in
my kitchen, than the green leaves of the forest,


    Nathelesse,
I checked my haughty will, and did not eat;


but supped upon sentiment, and dreamt vainly of “such morsels
sweet,” as I might not waking attain.


But, at this period, the whole scheme of my existence was about to change. The
orphan and neglected son of Verney, was on the eve of being linked to the
mechanism of society by a golden chain, and to enter into all the duties and
affections of life. Miracles were to be wrought in my favour, the machine of
social life pushed with vast effort backward. Attend, O reader! while I narrate
this tale of wonders!


One day as Adrian and Idris were riding through the forest, with their mother
and accustomed companions, Idris, drawing her brother aside from the rest of
the cavalcade, suddenly asked him, “What had become of his friend, Lionel
Verney?”


“Even from this spot,” replied Adrian, pointing to my
sister’s cottage, “you can see his dwelling.”


“Indeed!” said Idris, “and why, if he be so near, does he not
come to see us, and make one of our society?”


“I often visit him,” replied Adrian; “but you may easily
guess the motives, which prevent him from coming where his presence may annoy
any one among us.”


“I do guess them,” said Idris, “and such as they are, I would
not venture to combat them. Tell me, however, in what way he passes his time;
what he is doing and thinking in his cottage retreat?”


“Nay, my sweet sister,” replied Adrian, “you ask me more than
I can well answer; but if you feel interest in him, why not visit him? He will
feel highly honoured, and thus you may repay a part of the obligation I owe
him, and compensate for the injuries fortune has done him.”


“I will most readily accompany you to his abode,” said the lady,
“not that I wish that either of us should unburthen ourselves of our
debt, which, being no less than your life, must remain unpayable ever. But let
us go; to-morrow we will arrange to ride out together, and proceeding towards
that part of the forest, call upon him.”


The next evening therefore, though the autumnal change had brought on cold and
rain, Adrian and Idris entered my cottage. They found me Curius-like, feasting
on sorry fruits for supper; but they brought gifts richer than the golden
bribes of the Sabines, nor could I refuse the invaluable store of friendship
and delight which they bestowed. Surely the glorious twins of Latona were not
more welcome, when, in the infancy of the world, they were brought forth to
beautify and enlighten this “sterile promontory,” than were this
angelic pair to my lowly dwelling and grateful heart. We sat like one family
round my hearth. Our talk was on subjects, unconnected with the emotions that
evidently occupied each; but we each divined the other’s thought, and as
our voices spoke of indifferent matters, our eyes, in mute language, told a
thousand things no tongue could have uttered.


They left me in an hour’s time. They left me happy—how unspeakably
happy. It did not require the measured sounds of human language to syllable the
story of my extasy. Idris had visited me; Idris I should again and again
see—my imagination did not wander beyond the completeness of this
knowledge. I trod air; no doubt, no fear, no hope even, disturbed me; I clasped
with my soul the fulness of contentment, satisfied, undesiring, beatified.


For many days Adrian and Idris continued to visit me thus. In this dear
intercourse, love, in the guise of enthusiastic friendship, infused more and
more of his omnipotent spirit. Idris felt it. Yes, divinity of the world, I
read your characters in her looks and gesture; I heard your melodious voice
echoed by her—you prepared for us a soft and flowery path, all gentle
thoughts adorned it—your name, O Love, was not spoken, but you stood the
Genius of the Hour, veiled, and time, but no mortal hand, might raise the
curtain. Organs of articulate sound did not proclaim the union of our hearts;
for untoward circumstance allowed no opportunity for the expression that
hovered on our lips. Oh my pen! haste thou to write what was, before the
thought of what is, arrests the hand that guides thee. If I lift up my eyes and
see the desart earth, and feel that those dear eyes have spent their mortal
lustre, and that those beauteous lips are silent, their “crimson
leaves” faded, for ever I am mute!


But you live, my Idris, even now you move before me! There was a glade, O
reader! a grassy opening in the wood; the retiring trees left its velvet
expanse as a temple for love; the silver Thames bounded it on one side, and a
willow bending down dipt in the water its Naiad hair, dishevelled by the
wind’s viewless hand. The oaks around were the home of a tribe of
nightingales—there am I now; Idris, in youth’s dear prime, is by my
side —remember, I am just twenty-two, and seventeen summers have scarcely
passed over the beloved of my heart. The river swollen by autumnal rains,
deluged the low lands, and Adrian in his favourite boat is employed in the
dangerous pastime of plucking the topmost bough from a submerged oak. Are you
weary of life, O Adrian, that you thus play with danger?—


He has obtained his prize, and he pilots his boat through the flood; our eyes
were fixed on him fearfully, but the stream carried him away from us; he was
forced to land far lower down, and to make a considerable circuit before he
could join us. “He is safe!” said Idris, as he leapt on shore, and
waved the bough over his head in token of success; “we will wait for him
here.”


We were alone together; the sun had set; the song of the nightingales began;
the evening star shone distinct in the flood of light, which was yet unfaded in
the west. The blue eyes of my angelic girl were fixed on this sweet emblem of
herself: “How the light palpitates,” she said, “which is that
star’s life. Its vacillating effulgence seems to say that its state, even
like ours upon earth, is wavering and inconstant; it fears, methinks, and it
loves.”


“Gaze not on the star, dear, generous friend,” I cried, “read
not love in its trembling rays; look not upon distant worlds; speak not
of the mere imagination of a sentiment. I have long been silent; long even to
sickness have I desired to speak to you, and submit my soul, my life, my entire
being to you. Look not on the star, dear love, or do, and let that eternal
spark plead for me; let it be my witness and my advocate, silent as it
shines—love is to me as light to the star; even so long as that is
uneclipsed by annihilation, so long shall I love you.”


Veiled for ever to the world’s callous eye must be the transport of that
moment. Still do I feel her graceful form press against my full-fraught
heart—still does sight, and pulse, and breath sicken and fail, at the
remembrance of that first kiss. Slowly and silently we went to meet Adrian,
whom we heard approaching.


I entreated Adrian to return to me after he had conducted his sister home. And
that same evening, walking among the moon-lit forest paths, I poured forth my
whole heart, its transport and its hope, to my friend. For a moment he looked
disturbed—“I might have foreseen this,” he said, “what
strife will now ensue! Pardon me, Lionel, nor wonder that the expectation of
contest with my mother should jar me, when else I should delightedly confess
that my best hopes are fulfilled, in confiding my sister to your protection. If
you do not already know it, you will soon learn the deep hate my mother bears
to the name Verney. I will converse with Idris; then all that a friend can do,
I will do; to her it must belong to play the lover’s part, if she be
capable of it.”


While the brother and sister were still hesitating in what manner they could
best attempt to bring their mother over to their party, she, suspecting our
meetings, taxed her children with them; taxed her fair daughter with deceit,
and an unbecoming attachment for one whose only merit was being the son of the
profligate favourite of her imprudent father; and who was doubtless as
worthless as he from whom he boasted his descent. The eyes of Idris flashed at
this accusation; she replied, “I do not deny that I love Verney; prove to
me that he is worthless; and I will never see him more.”


“Dear Madam,” said Adrian, “let me entreat you to see him, to
cultivate his friendship. You will wonder then, as I do, at the extent of his
accomplishments, and the brilliancy of his talents.” (Pardon me, gentle
reader, this is not futile vanity;—not futile, since to know that Adrian
felt thus, brings joy even now to my lone heart).


“Mad and foolish boy!” exclaimed the angry lady, “you have
chosen with dreams and theories to overthrow my schemes for your own
aggrandizement; but you shall not do the same by those I have formed for your
sister. I but too well understand the fascination you both labour under; since
I had the same struggle with your father, to make him cast off the parent of
this youth, who hid his evil propensities with the smoothness and subtlety of a
viper. In those days how often did I hear of his attractions, his wide spread
conquests, his wit, his refined manners. It is well when flies only are caught
by such spiders’ webs; but is it for the high-born and powerful to bow
their necks to the flimsy yoke of these unmeaning pretensions? Were your sister
indeed the insignificant person she deserves to be, I would willingly leave her
to the fate, the wretched fate, of the wife of a man, whose very person,
resembling as it does his wretched father, ought to remind you of the folly and
vice it typifies—but remember, Lady Idris, it is not alone the once royal
blood of England that colours your veins, you are a Princess of Austria, and
every life-drop is akin to emperors and kings. Are you then a fit mate for an
uneducated shepherd-boy, whose only inheritance is his father’s tarnished
name?”


“I can make but one defence,” replied Idris, “the same
offered by my brother; see Lionel, converse with my
shepherd-boy”—-The Countess interrupted her
indignantly—“Yours!”—she cried: and then, smoothing her
impassioned features to a disdainful smile, she continued—“We will
talk of this another time. All I now ask, all your mother, Idris, requests is,
that you will not see this upstart during the interval of one month.”


“I dare not comply,” said Idris, “it would pain him too much.
I have no right to play with his feelings, to accept his proffered love, and
then sting him with neglect.”


“This is going too far,” her mother answered, with quivering lips,
and eyes again instinct by anger.


“Nay, Madam,” said Adrian, “unless my sister consent never to
see him again, it is surely an useless torment to separate them for a
month.”


“Certainly,” replied the ex-queen, with bitter scorn, “his
love, and her love, and both their childish flutterings, are to be put in fit
comparison with my years of hope and anxiety, with the duties of the offspring
of kings, with the high and dignified conduct which one of her descent ought to
pursue. But it is unworthy of me to argue and complain. Perhaps you will have
the goodness to promise me not to marry during that interval?”


This was asked only half ironically; and Idris wondered why her mother should
extort from her a solemn vow not to do, what she had never dreamed of
doing—but the promise was required and given.


All went on cheerfully now; we met as usual, and talked without dread of our
future plans. The Countess was so gentle, and even beyond her wont, amiable
with her children, that they began to entertain hopes of her ultimate consent.
She was too unlike them, too utterly alien to their tastes, for them to find
delight in her society, or in the prospect of its continuance, but it gave them
pleasure to see her conciliating and kind. Once even, Adrian ventured to
propose her receiving me. She refused with a smile, reminding him that for the
present his sister had promised to be patient.


One day, after the lapse of nearly a month, Adrian received a letter from a
friend in London, requesting his immediate presence for the furtherance of some
important object. Guileless himself, Adrian feared no deceit. I rode with him
as far as Staines: he was in high spirits; and, since I could not see Idris
during his absence, he promised a speedy return. His gaiety, which was extreme,
had the strange effect of awakening in me contrary feelings; a presentiment of
evil hung over me; I loitered on my return; I counted the hours that must
elapse before I saw Idris again. Wherefore should this be? What evil might not
happen in the mean time? Might not her mother take advantage of Adrian’s
absence to urge her beyond her sufferance, perhaps to entrap her? I resolved,
let what would befall, to see and converse with her the following day. This
determination soothed me. To-morrow, loveliest and best, hope and joy of my
life, to-morrow I will see thee—Fool, to dream of a moment’s delay!


I went to rest. At past midnight I was awaked by a violent knocking. It was now
deep winter; it had snowed, and was still snowing; the wind whistled in the
leafless trees, despoiling them of the white flakes as they fell; its drear
moaning, and the continued knocking, mingled wildly with my dreams— at
length I was wide awake; hastily dressing myself, I hurried to discover the
cause of this disturbance, and to open my door to the unexpected visitor. Pale
as the snow that showered about her, with clasped hands, Idris stood before me.
“Save me!” she exclaimed, and would have sunk to the ground had I
not supported her. In a moment however she revived, and, with energy, almost
with violence, entreated me to saddle horses, to take her away, away to
London—to her brother—at least to save her. I had no
horses—she wrung her hands. “What can I do?” she cried,
“I am lost—we are both for ever lost! But come—come with me,
Lionel; here I must not stay,—we can get a chaise at the nearest
post-house; yet perhaps we have time! come, O come with me to save and protect
me!”


When I heard her piteous demands, while with disordered dress, dishevelled
hair, and aghast looks, she wrung her hands—the idea shot across me is
she also mad?—“Sweet one,” and I folded her to my heart,
“better repose than wander further;—rest—my beloved, I will
make a fire—you are chill.”


“Rest!” she cried, “repose! you rave, Lionel! If you delay we
are lost; come, I pray you, unless you would cast me off for ever.”


That Idris, the princely born, nursling of wealth and luxury, should have come
through the tempestuous winter-night from her regal abode, and standing at my
lowly door, conjure me to fly with her through darkness and storm—was
surely a dream—again her plaintive tones, the sight of her loveliness
assured me that it was no vision. Looking timidly around, as if she feared to
be overheard, she whispered: “I have discovered—to-morrow
—that is, to-day—already the to-morrow is come—before dawn,
foreigners, Austrians, my mother’s hirelings, are to carry me off to
Germany, to prison, to marriage—to anything, except you and my brother
—take me away, or soon they will be here!”


I was frightened by her vehemence, and imagined some mistake in her incoherent
tale; but I no longer hesitated to obey her. She had come by herself from the
Castle, three long miles, at midnight, through the heavy snow; we must reach
Englefield Green, a mile and a half further, before we could obtain a chaise.
She told me, that she had kept up her strength and courage till her arrival at
my cottage, and then both failed. Now she could hardly walk. Supporting her as
I did, still she lagged: and at the distance of half a mile, after many
stoppages, shivering fits, and half faintings, she slipt from my supporting arm
on the snow, and with a torrent of tears averred that she must be taken, for
that she could not proceed. I lifted her up in my arms; her light form rested
on my breast.—I felt no burthen, except the internal one of contrary and
contending emotions. Brimming delight now invested me. Again her chill limbs
touched me as a torpedo; and I shuddered in sympathy with her pain and fright.
Her head lay on my shoulder, her breath waved my hair, her heart beat near
mine, transport made me tremble, blinded me, annihilated me—till a
suppressed groan, bursting from her lips, the chattering of her teeth, which
she strove vainly to subdue, and all the signs of suffering she evinced,
recalled me to the necessity of speed and succour. At last I said to her,
“There is Englefield Green; there the inn. But, if you are seen thus
strangely circumstanced, dear Idris, even now your enemies may learn your
flight too soon: were it not better that I hired the chaise alone? I will put
you in safety meanwhile, and return to you immediately.”


She answered that I was right, and might do with her as I pleased. I observed
the door of a small out-house a-jar. I pushed it open; and, with some hay
strewed about, I formed a couch for her, placing her exhausted frame on it, and
covering her with my cloak. I feared to leave her, she looked so wan and
faint—but in a moment she re-acquired animation, and, with that, fear;
and again she implored me not to delay. To call up the people of the inn, and
obtain a conveyance and horses, even though I harnessed them myself, was the
work of many minutes; minutes, each freighted with the weight of ages. I caused
the chaise to advance a little, waited till the people of the inn had retired,
and then made the post-boy draw up the carriage to the spot where Idris,
impatient, and now somewhat recovered, stood waiting for me. I lifted her into
the chaise; I assured her that with our four horses we should arrive in London
before five o’clock, the hour when she would be sought and missed. I
besought her to calm herself; a kindly shower of tears relieved her, and by
degrees she related her tale of fear and peril.


That same night after Adrian’s departure, her mother had warmly
expostulated with her on the subject of her attachment to me. Every motive,
every threat, every angry taunt was urged in vain. She seemed to consider that
through me she had lost Raymond; I was the evil influence of her life; I was
even accused of encreasing and confirming the mad and base apostacy of Adrian
from all views of advancement and grandeur; and now this miserable mountaineer
was to steal her daughter. Never, Idris related, did the angry lady deign to
recur to gentleness and persuasion; if she had, the task of resistance would
have been exquisitely painful. As it was, the sweet girl’s generous
nature was roused to defend, and ally herself with, my despised cause. Her
mother ended with a look of contempt and covert triumph, which for a moment
awakened the suspicions of Idris. When they parted for the night, the Countess
said, “To-morrow I trust your tone will be changed: be composed; I have
agitated you; go to rest; and I will send you a medicine I always take when
unduly restless—it will give you a quiet night.”


By the time that she had with uneasy thoughts laid her fair cheek upon her
pillow, her mother’s servant brought a draught; a suspicion again crossed
her at this novel proceeding, sufficiently alarming to determine her not to
take the potion; but dislike of contention, and a wish to discover whether
there was any just foundation for her conjectures, made her, she said, almost
instinctively, and in contradiction to her usual frankness, pretend to swallow
the medicine. Then, agitated as she had been by her mother’s violence,
and now by unaccustomed fears, she lay unable to sleep, starting at every
sound. Soon her door opened softly, and on her springing up, she heard a
whisper, “Not asleep yet,” and the door again closed. With a
beating heart she expected another visit, and when after an interval her
chamber was again invaded, having first assured herself that the intruders were
her mother and an attendant, she composed herself to feigned sleep. A step
approached her bed, she dared not move, she strove to calm her palpitations,
which became more violent, when she heard her mother say mutteringly,
“Pretty simpleton, little do you think that your game is already at an
end for ever.”


For a moment the poor girl fancied that her mother believed that she had drank
poison: she was on the point of springing up; when the Countess, already at a
distance from the bed, spoke in a low voice to her companion, and again Idris
listened: “Hasten,” said she, “there is no time to
lose— it is long past eleven; they will be here at five; take merely the
clothes necessary for her journey, and her jewel-casket.” The servant
obeyed; few words were spoken on either side; but those were caught at with
avidity by the intended victim. She heard the name of her own maid
mentioned;—“No, no,” replied her mother, “she does not
go with us; Lady Idris must forget England, and all belonging to it.” And
again she heard, “She will not wake till late to-morrow, and we shall
then be at sea.”——“All is ready,” at length the
woman announced. The Countess again came to her daughter’s bedside:
“In Austria at least,” she said, “you will obey. In Austria,
where obedience can be enforced, and no choice left but between an honourable
prison and a fitting marriage.”


Both then withdrew; though, as she went, the Countess said, “Softly; all
sleep; though all have not been prepared for sleep, like her. I would not have
any one suspect, or she might be roused to resistance, and perhaps escape. Come
with me to my room; we will remain there till the hour agreed upon.” They
went. Idris, panic-struck, but animated and strengthened even by her excessive
fear, dressed herself hurriedly, and going down a flight of back-stairs,
avoiding the vicinity of her mother’s apartment, she contrived to escape
from the castle by a low window, and came through snow, wind, and obscurity to
my cottage; nor lost her courage, until she arrived, and, depositing her fate
in my hands, gave herself up to the desperation and weariness that overwhelmed
her.


I comforted her as well as I might. Joy and exultation, were mine, to possess,
and to save her. Yet not to excite fresh agitation in her, “per non
turbar quel bel viso sereno,” I curbed my delight. I strove to quiet
the eager dancing of my heart; I turned from her my eyes, beaming with too much
tenderness, and proudly, to dark night, and the inclement atmosphere, murmured
the expressions of my transport. We reached London, methought, all too soon;
and yet I could not regret our speedy arrival, when I witnessed the extasy with
which my beloved girl found herself in her brother’s arms, safe from
every evil, under his unblamed protection.


Adrian wrote a brief note to his mother, informing her that Idris was under his
care and guardianship. Several days elapsed, and at last an answer came, dated
from Cologne. “It was useless,” the haughty and disappointed lady
wrote, “for the Earl of Windsor and his sister to address again the
injured parent, whose only expectation of tranquillity must be derived from
oblivion of their existence. Her desires had been blasted, her schemes
overthrown. She did not complain; in her brother’s court she would find,
not compensation for their disobedience (filial unkindness admitted of none),
but such a state of things and mode of life, as might best reconcile her to her
fate. Under such circumstances, she positively declined any communication with
them.”


Such were the strange and incredible events, that finally brought about my
union with the sister of my best friend, with my adored Idris. With simplicity
and courage she set aside the prejudices and opposition which were obstacles to
my happiness, nor scrupled to give her hand, where she had given her heart. To
be worthy of her, to raise myself to her height through the exertion of talents
and virtue, to repay her love with devoted, unwearied tenderness, were the only
thanks I could offer for the matchless gift.

</div></body></text></TEI>