<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="1">
INTRODUCTION.

I visited Naples in the year 1818. On the 8th of December of that year, my
companion and I crossed the Bay, to visit the antiquities which are scattered
on the shores of Baiæ. The translucent and shining waters of the calm sea
covered fragments of old Roman villas, which were interlaced by sea-weed, and
received diamond tints from the chequering of the sun-beams; the blue and
pellucid element was such as Galatea might have skimmed in her car of mother of
pearl; or Cleopatra, more fitly than the Nile, have chosen as the path of her
magic ship. Though it was winter, the atmosphere seemed more appropriate to
early spring; and its genial warmth contributed to inspire those sensations of
placid delight, which are the portion of every traveller, as he lingers, loath
to quit the tranquil bays and radiant promontories of Baiæ.


We visited the so called Elysian Fields and Avernus; and wandered through
various ruined temples, baths, and classic spots; at length we entered the
gloomy cavern of the Cumæan Sibyl. Our Lazzeroni bore flaring torches, which
shone red, and almost dusky, in the murky subterranean passages, whose darkness
thirstily surrounding them, seemed eager to imbibe more and more of the element
of light. We passed by a natural archway, leading to a second gallery, and
enquired, if we could not enter there also. The guides pointed to the
reflection of their torches on the water that paved it, leaving us to form our
own conclusion; but adding it was a pity, for it led to the Sibyl’s Cave.
Our curiosity and enthusiasm were excited by this circumstance, and we insisted
upon attempting the passage. As is usually the case in the prosecution of such
enterprizes, the difficulties decreased on examination. We found, on each side
of the humid pathway, “dry land for the sole of the foot.” At
length we arrived at a large, desert, dark cavern, which the Lazzeroni assured
us was the Sibyl’s Cave. We were sufficiently disappointed—Yet we
examined it with care, as if its blank, rocky walls could still bear trace of
celestial visitant. On one side was a small opening. Whither does this lead? we
asked: can we enter here?—“Questo poi, no,”—said
the wild looking savage, who held the torch; “you can advance but a short
distance, and nobody visits it.”


“Nevertheless, I will try it,” said my companion; “it may
lead to the real cavern. Shall I go alone, or will you accompany me?”


I signified my readiness to proceed, but our guides protested against such a
measure. With great volubility, in their native Neapolitan dialect, with which
we were not very familiar, they told us that there were spectres, that the roof
would fall in, that it was too narrow to admit us, that there was a deep hole
within, filled with water, and we might be drowned. My friend shortened the
harangue, by taking the man’s torch from him; and we proceeded alone.


The passage, which at first scarcely admitted us, quickly grew narrower and
lower; we were almost bent double; yet still we persisted in making our way
through it. At length we entered a wider space, and the low roof heightened;
but, as we congratulated ourselves on this change, our torch was extinguished
by a current of air, and we were left in utter darkness. The guides bring with
them materials for renewing the light, but we had none—our only resource
was to return as we came. We groped round the widened space to find the
entrance, and after a time fancied that we had succeeded. This proved however
to be a second passage, which evidently ascended. It terminated like the
former; though something approaching to a ray, we could not tell whence, shed a
very doubtful twilight in the space. By degrees, our eyes grew somewhat
accustomed to this dimness, and we perceived that there was no direct passage
leading us further; but that it was possible to climb one side of the cavern to
a low arch at top, which promised a more easy path, from whence we now
discovered that this light proceeded. With considerable difficulty we scrambled
up, and came to another passage with still more of illumination, and this led
to another ascent like the former.


After a succession of these, which our resolution alone permitted us to
surmount, we arrived at a wide cavern with an arched dome-like roof. An
aperture in the midst let in the light of heaven; but this was overgrown with
brambles and underwood, which acted as a veil, obscuring the day, and giving a
solemn religious hue to the apartment. It was spacious, and nearly circular,
with a raised seat of stone, about the size of a Grecian couch, at one end. The
only sign that life had been here, was the perfect snow-white skeleton of a
goat, which had probably not perceived the opening as it grazed on the hill
above, and had fallen headlong. Ages perhaps had elapsed since this
catastrophe; and the ruin it had made above, had been repaired by the growth of
vegetation during many hundred summers.


The rest of the furniture of the cavern consisted of piles of leaves, fragments
of bark, and a white filmy substance, resembling the inner part of the green
hood which shelters the grain of the unripe Indian corn. We were fatigued by
our struggles to attain this point, and seated ourselves on the rocky couch,
while the sounds of tinkling sheep-bells, and shout of shepherd-boy, reached us
from above.


At length my friend, who had taken up some of the leaves strewed about,
exclaimed, “This is the Sibyl’s cave; these are Sibylline
leaves.” On examination, we found that all the leaves, bark, and other
substances, were traced with written characters. What appeared to us more
astonishing, was that these writings were expressed in various languages: some
unknown to my companion, ancient Chaldee, and Egyptian hieroglyphics, old as
the Pyramids. Stranger still, some were in modern dialects, English and
Italian. We could make out little by the dim light, but they seemed to contain
prophecies, detailed relations of events but lately passed; names, now well
known, but of modern date; and often exclamations of exultation or woe, of
victory or defeat, were traced on their thin scant pages. This was certainly
the Sibyl’s Cave; not indeed exactly as Virgil describes it; but the
whole of this land had been so convulsed by earthquake and volcano, that the
change was not wonderful, though the traces of ruin were effaced by time; and
we probably owed the preservation of these leaves, to the accident which had
closed the mouth of the cavern, and the swift-growing vegetation which had
rendered its sole opening impervious to the storm. We made a hasty selection of
such of the leaves, whose writing one at least of us could understand; and
then, laden with our treasure, we bade adieu to the dim hypæthric cavern, and
after much difficulty succeeded in rejoining our guides.


During our stay at Naples, we often returned to this cave, sometimes alone,
skimming the sun-lit sea, and each time added to our store. Since that period,
whenever the world’s circumstance has not imperiously called me away, or
the temper of my mind impeded such study, I have been employed in deciphering
these sacred remains. Their meaning, wondrous and eloquent, has often repaid my
toil, soothing me in sorrow, and exciting my imagination to daring flights,
through the immensity of nature and the mind of man. For awhile my labours were
not solitary; but that time is gone; and, with the selected and matchless
companion of my toils, their dearest reward is also lost to me—


Di mie tenere frondi altro lavoro
Credea mostrarte; e qual fero pianeta
Ne’ nvidiò insieme, o mio nobil tesoro?


I present the public with my latest discoveries in the slight Sibylline pages.
Scattered and unconnected as they were, I have been obliged to add links, and
model the work into a consistent form. But the main substance rests on the
truths contained in these poetic rhapsodies, and the divine intuition which the
Cumæan damsel obtained from heaven.


I have often wondered at the subject of her verses, and at the English dress of
the Latin poet. Sometimes I have thought, that, obscure and chaotic as they
are, they owe their present form to me, their decipherer. As if we should give
to another artist, the painted fragments which form the mosaic copy of
Raphael’s Transfiguration in St. Peter’s; he would put them
together in a form, whose mode would be fashioned by his own peculiar mind and
talent. Doubtless the leaves of the Cumæan Sibyl have suffered distortion and
diminution of interest and excellence in my hands. My only excuse for thus
transforming them, is that they were unintelligible in their pristine
condition.


My labours have cheered long hours of solitude, and taken me out of a world,
which has averted its once benignant face from me, to one glowing with
imagination and power. Will my readers ask how I could find solace from the
narration of misery and woeful change? This is one of the mysteries of our
nature, which holds full sway over me, and from whose influence I cannot
escape. I confess, that I have not been unmoved by the development of the tale;
and that I have been depressed, nay, agonized, at some parts of the recital,
which I have faithfully transcribed from my materials. Yet such is human
nature, that the excitement of mind was dear to me, and that the imagination,
painter of tempest and earthquake, or, worse, the stormy and ruin-fraught
passions of man, softened my real sorrows and endless regrets, by clothing
these fictitious ones in that ideality, which takes the mortal sting from pain.


I hardly know whether this apology is necessary. For the merits of my
adaptation and translation must decide how far I have well bestowed my time and
imperfect powers, in giving form and substance to the frail and attenuated
Leaves of the Sibyl.

</div></body></text></TEI>