<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="8">
CHAPTER VI.

And now let the reader, passing over some short period of time, be introduced
to our happy circle. Adrian, Idris and I, were established in Windsor Castle;
Lord Raymond and my sister, inhabited a house which the former had built on the
borders of the Great Park, near Perdita’s cottage, as was still named the
low-roofed abode, where we two, poor even in hope, had each received the
assurance of our felicity. We had our separate occupations and our common
amusements. Sometimes we passed whole days under the leafy covert of the forest
with our books and music. This occurred during those rare days in this country,
when the sun mounts his etherial throne in unclouded majesty, and the windless
atmosphere is as a bath of pellucid and grateful water, wrapping the senses in
tranquillity. When the clouds veiled the sky, and the wind scattered them there
and here, rending their woof, and strewing its fragments through the aerial
plains—then we rode out, and sought new spots of beauty and repose. When
the frequent rains shut us within doors, evening recreation followed morning
study, ushered in by music and song. Idris had a natural musical talent; and
her voice, which had been carefully cultivated, was full and sweet. Raymond and
I made a part of the concert, and Adrian and Perdita were devout listeners.
Then we were as gay as summer insects, playful as children; we ever met one
another with smiles, and read content and joy in each other’s
countenances. Our prime festivals were held in Perdita’s cottage; nor
were we ever weary of talking of the past or dreaming of the future. Jealousy
and disquiet were unknown among us; nor did a fear or hope of change ever
disturb our tranquillity. Others said, We might be happy—we said—We
are.


When any separation took place between us, it generally so happened, that Idris
and Perdita would ramble away together, and we remained to discuss the affairs
of nations, and the philosophy of life. The very difference of our dispositions
gave zest to these conversations. Adrian had the superiority in learning and
eloquence; but Raymond possessed a quick penetration, and a practical knowledge
of life, which usually displayed itself in opposition to Adrian, and thus kept
up the ball of discussion. At other times we made excursions of many
days’ duration, and crossed the country to visit any spot noted for
beauty or historical association. Sometimes we went up to London, and entered
into the amusements of the busy throng; sometimes our retreat was invaded by
visitors from among them. This change made us only the more sensible to the
delights of the intimate intercourse of our own circle, the tranquillity of our
divine forest, and our happy evenings in the halls of our beloved Castle.


The disposition of Idris was peculiarly frank, soft, and affectionate. Her
temper was unalterably sweet; and although firm and resolute on any point that
touched her heart, she was yielding to those she loved. The nature of Perdita
was less perfect; but tenderness and happiness improved her temper, and
softened her natural reserve. Her understanding was clear and comprehensive,
her imagination vivid; she was sincere, generous, and reasonable. Adrian, the
matchless brother of my soul, the sensitive and excellent Adrian, loving all,
and beloved by all, yet seemed destined not to find the half of himself, which
was to complete his happiness. He often left us, and wandered by himself in the
woods, or sailed in his little skiff, his books his only companions. He was
often the gayest of our party, at the same time that he was the only one
visited by fits of despondency; his slender frame seemed overcharged with the
weight of life, and his soul appeared rather to inhabit his body than unite
with it. I was hardly more devoted to my Idris than to her brother, and she
loved him as her teacher, her friend, the benefactor who had secured to her the
fulfilment of her dearest wishes. Raymond, the ambitious, restless Raymond,
reposed midway on the great high-road of life, and was content to give up all
his schemes of sovereignty and fame, to make one of us, the flowers of the
field. His kingdom was the heart of Perdita, his subjects her thoughts; by her
he was loved, respected as a superior being, obeyed, waited on. No office, no
devotion, no watching was irksome to her, as it regarded him. She would sit
apart from us and watch him; she would weep for joy to think that he was hers.
She erected a temple for him in the depth of her being, and each faculty was a
priestess vowed to his service. Sometimes she might be wayward and capricious;
but her repentance was bitter, her return entire, and even this inequality of
temper suited him who was not formed by nature to float idly down the stream of
life.


During the first year of their marriage, Perdita presented Raymond with a
lovely girl. It was curious to trace in this miniature model the very traits of
its father. The same half-disdainful lips and smile of triumph, the same
intelligent eyes, the same brow and chestnut hair; her very hands and taper
fingers resembled his. How very dear she was to Perdita! In progress of time, I
also became a father, and our little darlings, our playthings and delights,
called forth a thousand new and delicious feelings.


Years passed thus,—even years. Each month brought forth its successor,
each year one like to that gone by; truly, our lives were a living comment on
that beautiful sentiment of Plutarch, that “our souls have a natural
inclination to love, being born as much to love, as to feel, to reason, to
understand and remember.” We talked of change and active pursuits, but
still remained at Windsor, incapable of violating the charm that attached us to
our secluded life.


Pareamo aver qui tutto il ben raccolto
Che fra mortali in più parte si rimembra.


Now also that our children gave us occupation, we found excuses for our
idleness, in the idea of bringing them up to a more splendid career. At length
our tranquillity was disturbed, and the course of events, which for five years
had flowed on in hushing tranquillity, was broken by breakers and obstacles,
that woke us from our pleasant dream.


A new Lord Protector of England was to be chosen; and, at Raymond’s
request, we removed to London, to witness, and even take a part in the
election. If Raymond had been united to Idris, this post had been his
stepping-stone to higher dignity; and his desire for power and fame had been
crowned with fullest measure. He had exchanged a sceptre for a lute, a kingdom
for Perdita.


Did he think of this as we journeyed up to town? I watched him, but could make
but little of him. He was particularly gay, playing with his child, and turning
to sport every word that was uttered. Perhaps he did this because he saw a
cloud upon Perdita’s brow. She tried to rouse herself, but her eyes every
now and then filled with tears, and she looked wistfully on Raymond and her
girl, as if fearful that some evil would betide them. And so she felt. A
presentiment of ill hung over her. She leaned from the window looking on the
forest, and the turrets of the Castle, and as these became hid by intervening
objects, she passionately exclaimed—“Scenes of happiness! scenes
sacred to devoted love, when shall I see you again! and when I see ye, shall I
be still the beloved and joyous Perdita, or shall I, heart-broken and lost,
wander among your groves, the ghost of what I am!”


“Why, silly one,” cried Raymond, “what is your little head
pondering upon, that of a sudden you have become so sublimely dismal? Cheer up,
or I shall make you over to Idris, and call Adrian into the carriage, who, I
see by his gesture, sympathizes with my good spirits.”


Adrian was on horseback; he rode up to the carriage, and his gaiety, in
addition to that of Raymond, dispelled my sister’s melancholy. We entered
London in the evening, and went to our several abodes near Hyde Park.


The following morning Lord Raymond visited me early. “I come to
you,” he said, “only half assured that you will assist me in my
project, but resolved to go through with it, whether you concur with me or not.
Promise me secrecy however; for if you will not contribute to my success, at
least you must not baffle me.”


“Well, I promise. And now—-”


“And now, my dear fellow, for what are we come to London? To be present
at the election of a Protector, and to give our yea or nay for his shuffling
Grace of——? or for that noisy Ryland? Do you believe, Verney, that
I brought you to town for that? No, we will have a Protector of our own. We
will set up a candidate, and ensure his success. We will nominate Adrian, and
do our best to bestow on him the power to which he is entitled by his birth,
and which he merits through his virtues.


“Do not answer; I know all your objections, and will reply to them in
order. First, Whether he will or will not consent to become a great man? Leave
the task of persuasion on that point to me; I do not ask you to assist me
there. Secondly, Whether he ought to exchange his employment of plucking
blackberries, and nursing wounded partridges in the forest, for the command of
a nation? My dear Lionel, we are married men, and find employment sufficient in
amusing our wives, and dancing our children. But Adrian is alone, wifeless,
childless, unoccupied. I have long observed him. He pines for want of some
interest in life. His heart, exhausted by his early sufferings, reposes like a
new-healed limb, and shrinks from all excitement. But his understanding, his
charity, his virtues, want a field for exercise and display; and we will
procure it for him. Besides, is it not a shame, that the genius of Adrian
should fade from the earth like a flower in an untrod mountain-path, fruitless?
Do you think Nature composed his surpassing machine for no purpose? Believe me,
he was destined to be the author of infinite good to his native England. Has
she not bestowed on him every gift in prodigality?—birth, wealth, talent,
goodness? Does not every one love and admire him? and does he not delight
singly in such efforts as manifest his love to all? Come, I see that you are
already persuaded, and will second me when I propose him to-night in
parliament.”


“You have got up all your arguments in excellent order,” I replied;
“and, if Adrian consent, they are unanswerable. One only condition I
would make, —that you do nothing without his concurrence.”


“I believe you are in the right,” said Raymond; “although I
had thought at first to arrange the affair differently. Be it so. I will go
instantly to Adrian; and, if he inclines to consent, you will not destroy my
labour by persuading him to return, and turn squirrel again in Windsor Forest.
Idris, you will not act the traitor towards me?”


“Trust me,” replied she, “I will preserve a strict
neutrality.”


“For my part,” said I, “I am too well convinced of the worth
of our friend, and the rich harvest of benefits that all England would reap
from his Protectorship, to deprive my countrymen of such a blessing, if he
consent to bestow it on them.”


In the evening Adrian visited us.—“Do you cabal also against
me,” said he, laughing; “and will you make common cause with
Raymond, in dragging a poor visionary from the clouds to surround him with the
fire-works and blasts of earthly grandeur, instead of heavenly rays and airs? I
thought you knew me better.”


“I do know you better,” I replied “than to think that you
would be happy in such a situation; but the good you would do to others may be
an inducement, since the time is probably arrived when you can put your
theories into practice, and you may bring about such reformation and change, as
will conduce to that perfect system of government which you delight to
portray.”


“You speak of an almost-forgotten dream,” said Adrian, his
countenance slightly clouding as he spoke; “the visions of my boyhood
have long since faded in the light of reality; I know now that I am not a man
fitted to govern nations; sufficient for me, if I keep in wholesome rule the
little kingdom of my own mortality.


“But do not you see, Lionel, the drift of our noble friend; a drift,
perhaps, unknown to himself, but apparent to me. Lord Raymond was never born to
be a drone in the hive, and to find content in our pastoral life. He thinks,
that he ought to be satisfied; he imagines, that his present situation
precludes the possibility of aggrandisement; he does not therefore, even in his
own heart, plan change for himself. But do you not see, that, under the idea of
exalting me, he is chalking out a new path for himself; a path of action from
which he has long wandered?


“Let us assist him. He, the noble, the warlike, the great in every
quality that can adorn the mind and person of man; he is fitted to be the
Protector of England. If I—that is, if we propose him, he
will assuredly be elected, and will find, in the functions of that high office,
scope for the towering powers of his mind. Even Perdita will rejoice. Perdita,
in whom ambition was a covered fire until she married Raymond, which event was
for a time the fulfilment of her hopes; Perdita will rejoice in the glory and
advancement of her lord—and, coyly and prettily, not be discontented with
her share. In the mean time, we, the wise of the land, will return to our
Castle, and, Cincinnatus-like, take to our usual labours, until our friend
shall require our presence and assistance here.”


The more Adrian reasoned upon this scheme, the more feasible it appeared. His
own determination never to enter into public life was insurmountable, and the
delicacy of his health was a sufficient argument against it. The next step was
to induce Raymond to confess his secret wishes for dignity and fame. He entered
while we were speaking. The way in which Adrian had received his project for
setting him up as a candidate for the Protectorship, and his replies, had
already awakened in his mind, the view of the subject which we were now
discussing. His countenance and manner betrayed irresolution and anxiety; but
the anxiety arose from a fear that we should not prosecute, or not succeed in
our idea; and his irresolution, from a doubt whether we should risk a defeat. A
few words from us decided him, and hope and joy sparkled in his eyes; the idea
of embarking in a career, so congenial to his early habits and cherished
wishes, made him as before energetic and bold. We discussed his chances, the
merits of the other candidates, and the dispositions of the voters.


After all we miscalculated. Raymond had lost much of his popularity, and was
deserted by his peculiar partizans. Absence from the busy stage had caused him
to be forgotten by the people; his former parliamentary supporters were
principally composed of royalists, who had been willing to make an idol of him
when he appeared as the heir of the Earldom of Windsor; but who were
indifferent to him, when he came forward with no other attributes and
distinctions than they conceived to be common to many among themselves. Still
he had many friends, admirers of his transcendent talents; his presence in the
house, his eloquence, address and imposing beauty, were calculated to produce
an electric effect. Adrian also, notwithstanding his recluse habits and
theories, so adverse to the spirit of party, had many friends, and they were
easily induced to vote for a candidate of his selection.


The Duke of——, and Mr. Ryland, Lord Raymond’s old antagonist,
were the other candidates. The Duke was supported by all the aristocrats of the
republic, who considered him their proper representative. Ryland was the
popular candidate; when Lord Raymond was first added to the list, his chance of
success appeared small. We retired from the debate which had followed on his
nomination: we, his nominators, mortified; he dispirited to excess. Perdita
reproached us bitterly. Her expectations had been strongly excited; she had
urged nothing against our project, on the contrary, she was evidently pleased
by it; but its evident ill success changed the current of her ideas. She felt,
that, once awakened, Raymond would never return unrepining to Windsor. His
habits were unhinged; his restless mind roused from its sleep, ambition must
now be his companion through life; and if he did not succeed in his present
attempt, she foresaw that unhappiness and cureless discontent would follow.
Perhaps her own disappointment added a sting to her thoughts and words; she did
not spare us, and our own reflections added to our disquietude.


It was necessary to follow up our nomination, and to persuade Raymond to
present himself to the electors on the following evening. For a long time he
was obstinate. He would embark in a balloon; he would sail for a distant
quarter of the world, where his name and humiliation were unknown. But this was
useless; his attempt was registered; his purpose published to the world; his
shame could never be erased from the memories of men. It was as well to fail at
last after a struggle, as to fly now at the beginning of his enterprise.


From the moment that he adopted this idea, he was changed. His depression and
anxiety fled; he became all life and activity. The smile of triumph shone on
his countenance; determined to pursue his object to the uttermost, his manner
and expression seem ominous of the accomplishment of his wishes. Not so
Perdita. She was frightened by his gaiety, for she dreaded a greater revulsion
at the end. If his appearance even inspired us with hope, it only rendered the
state of her mind more painful. She feared to lose sight of him; yet she
dreaded to remark any change in the temper of his mind. She listened eagerly to
him, yet tantalized herself by giving to his words a meaning foreign to their
true interpretation, and adverse to her hopes. She dared not be present at the
contest; yet she remained at home a prey to double solicitude. She wept over
her little girl; she looked, she spoke, as if she dreaded the occurrence of
some frightful calamity. She was half mad from the effects of uncontrollable
agitation.


Lord Raymond presented himself to the house with fearless confidence and
insinuating address. After the Duke of——and Mr. Ryland had finished
their speeches, he commenced. Assuredly he had not conned his lesson; and at
first he hesitated, pausing in his ideas, and in the choice of his expressions.
By degrees he warmed; his words flowed with ease, his language was full of
vigour, and his voice of persuasion. He reverted to his past life, his
successes in Greece, his favour at home. Why should he lose this, now that
added years, prudence, and the pledge which his marriage gave to his country,
ought to encrease, rather than diminish his claims to confidence? He spoke of
the state of England; the necessary measures to be taken to ensure its
security, and confirm its prosperity. He drew a glowing picture of its present
situation. As he spoke, every sound was hushed, every thought suspended by
intense attention. His graceful elocution enchained the senses of his hearers.
In some degree also he was fitted to reconcile all parties. His birth pleased
the aristocracy; his being the candidate recommended by Adrian, a man
intimately allied to the popular party, caused a number, who had no great
reliance either on the Duke or Mr. Ryland, to range on his side.


The contest was keen and doubtful. Neither Adrian nor myself would have been so
anxious, if our own success had depended on our exertions; but we had egged our
friend on to the enterprise, and it became us to ensure his triumph. Idris, who
entertained the highest opinion of his abilities, was warmly interested in the
event: and my poor sister, who dared not hope, and to whom fear was misery, was
plunged into a fever of disquietude.


Day after day passed while we discussed our projects for the evening, and each
night was occupied by debates which offered no conclusion. At last the crisis
came: the night when parliament, which had so long delayed its choice, must
decide: as the hour of twelve passed, and the new day began, it was by virtue
of the constitution dissolved, its power extinct.


We assembled at Raymond’s house, we and our partizans. At half past five
o’clock we proceeded to the House. Idris endeavoured to calm Perdita; but
the poor girl’s agitation deprived her of all power of self-command. She
walked up and down the room,—gazed wildly when any one entered, fancying
that they might be the announcers of her doom. I must do justice to my sweet
sister: it was not for herself that she was thus agonized. She alone knew the
weight which Raymond attached to his success. Even to us he assumed gaiety and
hope, and assumed them so well, that we did not divine the secret workings of
his mind. Sometimes a nervous trembling, a sharp dissonance of voice, and
momentary fits of absence revealed to Perdita the violence he did himself; but
we, intent on our plans, observed only his ready laugh, his joke intruded on
all occasions, the flow of his spirits which seemed incapable of ebb. Besides,
Perdita was with him in his retirement; she saw the moodiness that succeeded to
this forced hilarity; she marked his disturbed sleep, his painful
irritability—once she had seen his tears—hers had scarce ceased to
flow, since she had beheld the big drops which disappointed pride had caused to
gather in his eye, but which pride was unable to dispel. What wonder then, that
her feelings were wrought to this pitch! I thus accounted to myself for her
agitation; but this was not all, and the sequel revealed another excuse.


One moment we seized before our departure, to take leave of our beloved girls.
I had small hope of success, and entreated Idris to watch over my sister. As I
approached the latter, she seized my hand, and drew me into another apartment;
she threw herself into my arms, and wept and sobbed bitterly and long. I tried
to soothe her; I bade her hope; I asked what tremendous consequences would
ensue even on our failure. “My brother,” she cried,
“protector of my childhood, dear, most dear Lionel, my fate hangs by a
thread. I have you all about me now—you, the companion of my infancy;
Adrian, as dear to me as if bound by the ties of blood; Idris, the sister of my
heart, and her lovely offspring. This, O this may be the last time that you
will surround me thus!”


Abruptly she stopped, and then cried: “What have I said?—foolish
false girl that I am!” She looked wildly on me, and then suddenly calming
herself, apologized for what she called her unmeaning words, saying that she
must indeed be insane, for, while Raymond lived, she must be happy; and then,
though she still wept, she suffered me tranquilly to depart. Raymond only took
her hand when he went, and looked on her expressively; she answered by a look
of intelligence and assent.


Poor girl! what she then suffered! I could never entirely forgive Raymond for
the trials he imposed on her, occasioned as they were by a selfish feeling on
his part. He had schemed, if he failed in his present attempt, without taking
leave of any of us, to embark for Greece, and never again to revisit England.
Perdita acceded to his wishes; for his contentment was the chief object of her
life, the crown of her enjoyment; but to leave us all, her companions, the
beloved partners of her happiest years, and in the interim to conceal this
frightful determination, was a task that almost conquered her strength of mind.
She had been employed in arranging for their departure; she had promised
Raymond during this decisive evening, to take advantage of our absence, to go
one stage of the journey, and he, after his defeat was ascertained, would slip
away from us, and join her.


Although, when I was informed of this scheme, I was bitterly offended by the
small attention which Raymond paid to my sister’s feelings, I was led by
reflection to consider, that he acted under the force of such strong
excitement, as to take from him the consciousness, and, consequently, the guilt
of a fault. If he had permitted us to witness his agitation, he would have been
more under the guidance of reason; but his struggles for the shew of composure,
acted with such violence on his nerves, as to destroy his power of
self-command. I am convinced that, at the worst, he would have returned from
the seashore to take leave of us, and to make us the partners of his council.
But the task imposed on Perdita was not the less painful. He had extorted from
her a vow of secrecy; and her part of the drama, since it was to be performed
alone, was the most agonizing that could be devised. But to return to my
narrative.


The debates had hitherto been long and loud; they had often been protracted
merely for the sake of delay. But now each seemed fearful lest the fatal moment
should pass, while the choice was yet undecided. Unwonted silence reigned in
the house, the members spoke in whispers, and the ordinary business was
transacted with celerity and quietness. During the first stage of the election,
the Duke of——had been thrown out; the question therefore lay
between Lord Raymond and Mr. Ryland. The latter had felt secure of victory,
until the appearance of Raymond; and, since his name had been inserted as a
candidate, he had canvassed with eagerness. He had appeared each evening,
impatience and anger marked in his looks, scowling on us from the opposite side
of St. Stephen’s, as if his mere frown would cast eclipse on our hopes.


Every thing in the English constitution had been regulated for the better
preservation of peace. On the last day, two candidates only were allowed to
remain; and to obviate, if possible, the last struggle between these, a bribe
was offered to him who should voluntarily resign his pretensions; a place of
great emolument and honour was given him, and his success facilitated at a
future election. Strange to say however, no instance had yet occurred, where
either candidate had had recourse to this expedient; in consequence the law had
become obsolete, nor had been referred to by any of us in our discussions. To
our extreme surprise, when it was moved that we should resolve ourselves into a
committee for the election of the Lord Protector, the member who had nominated
Ryland, rose and informed us that this candidate had resigned his pretensions.
His information was at first received with silence; a confused murmur
succeeded; and, when the chairman declared Lord Raymond duly chosen, it
amounted to a shout of applause and victory. It seemed as if, far from any
dread of defeat even if Mr. Ryland had not resigned, every voice would have
been united in favour of our candidate. In fact, now that the idea of contest
was dismissed, all hearts returned to their former respect and admiration of
our accomplished friend. Each felt, that England had never seen a Protector so
capable of fulfilling the arduous duties of that high office. One voice made of
many voices, resounded through the chamber; it syllabled the name of Raymond.


He entered. I was on one of the highest seats, and saw him walk up the passage
to the table of the speaker. The native modesty of his disposition conquered
the joy of his triumph. He looked round timidly; a mist seemed before his eyes.
Adrian, who was beside me, hastened to him, and jumping down the benches, was
at his side in a moment. His appearance re-animated our friend; and, when he
came to speak and act, his hesitation vanished, and he shone out supreme in
majesty and victory. The former Protector tendered him the oaths, and presented
him with the insignia of office, performing the ceremonies of installation. The
house then dissolved. The chief members of the state crowded round the new
magistrate, and conducted him to the palace of government. Adrian suddenly
vanished; and, by the time that Raymond’s supporters were reduced to our
intimate friends merely, returned leading Idris to congratulate her friend on
his success.


But where was Perdita? In securing solicitously an unobserved retreat in case
of failure, Raymond had forgotten to arrange the mode by which she was to hear
of his success; and she had been too much agitated to revert to this
circumstance. When Idris entered, so far had Raymond forgotten himself, that he
asked for my sister; one word, which told of her mysterious disappearance,
recalled him. Adrian it is true had already gone to seek the fugitive,
imagining that her tameless anxiety had led her to the purlieus of the House,
and that some sinister event detained her. But Raymond, without explaining
himself, suddenly quitted us, and in another moment we heard him gallop down
the street, in spite of the wind and rain that scattered tempest over the
earth. We did not know how far he had to go, and soon separated, supposing that
in a short time he would return to the palace with Perdita, and that they would
not be sorry to find themselves alone.


Perdita had arrived with her child at Dartford, weeping and inconsolable. She
directed everything to be prepared for the continuance of their journey, and
placing her lovely sleeping charge on a bed, passed several hours in acute
suffering. Sometimes she observed the war of elements, thinking that they also
declared against her, and listened to the pattering of the rain in gloomy
despair. Sometimes she hung over her child, tracing her resemblance to the
father, and fearful lest in after life she should display the same passions and
uncontrollable impulses, that rendered him unhappy. Again, with a gush of pride
and delight, she marked in the features of her little girl, the same smile of
beauty that often irradiated Raymond’s countenance. The sight of it
soothed her. She thought of the treasure she possessed in the affections of her
lord; of his accomplishments, surpassing those of his contemporaries, his
genius, his devotion to her.—Soon she thought, that all she possessed in
the world, except him, might well be spared, nay, given with delight, a
propitiatory offering, to secure the supreme good she retained in him. Soon she
imagined, that fate demanded this sacrifice from her, as a mark she was devoted
to Raymond, and that it must be made with cheerfulness. She figured to herself
their life in the Greek isle he had selected for their retreat; her task of
soothing him; her cares for the beauteous Clara, her rides in his company, her
dedication of herself to his consolation. The picture then presented itself to
her in such glowing colours, that she feared the reverse, and a life of
magnificence and power in London; where Raymond would no longer be hers only,
nor she the sole source of happiness to him. So far as she merely was
concerned, she began to hope for defeat; and it was only on his account that
her feelings vacillated, as she heard him gallop into the court-yard of the
inn. That he should come to her alone, wetted by the storm, careless of every
thing except speed, what else could it mean, than that, vanquished and
solitary, they were to take their way from native England, the scene of shame,
and hide themselves in the myrtle groves of the Grecian isles?


In a moment she was in his arms. The knowledge of his success had become so
much a part of himself, that he forgot that it was necessary to impart it to
his companion. She only felt in his embrace a dear assurance that while he
possessed her, he would not despair. “This is kind,” she cried;
“this is noble, my own beloved! O fear not disgrace or lowly fortune,
while you have your Perdita; fear not sorrow, while our child lives and smiles.
Let us go even where you will; the love that accompanies us will prevent our
regrets.”


Locked in his embrace, she spoke thus, and cast back her head, seeking an
assent to her words in his eyes—they were sparkling with ineffable
delight. “Why, my little Lady Protectress,” said he, playfully,
“what is this you say? And what pretty scheme have you woven of exile and
obscurity, while a brighter web, a gold-enwoven tissue, is that which, in
truth, you ought to contemplate?”


He kissed her brow—but the wayward girl, half sorry at his triumph,
agitated by swift change of thought, hid her face in his bosom and wept. He
comforted her; he instilled into her his own hopes and desires; and soon her
countenance beamed with sympathy. How very happy were they that night! How full
even to bursting was their sense of joy!

</div></body></text></TEI>