<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="31">
CHAPTER VIII.

We had now reached Switzerland, so long the final mark and aim of our
exertions. We had looked, I know not wherefore, with hope and pleasing
expectation on her congregation of hills and snowy crags, and opened our bosoms
with renewed spirits to the icy Biz, which even at Midsummer used to come from
the northern glacier laden with cold. Yet how could we nourish expectation of
relief? Like our native England, and the vast extent of fertile France, this
mountain-embowered land was desolate of its inhabitants. Nor bleak
mountain-top, nor snow-nourished rivulet; not the ice-laden Biz, nor thunder,
the tamer of contagion, had preserved them— why therefore should we claim
exemption?


Who was there indeed to save? What troop had we brought fit to stand at bay,
and combat with the conqueror? We were a failing remnant, tamed to mere
submission to the coming blow. A train half dead, through fear of death—a
hopeless, unresisting, almost reckless crew, which, in the tossed bark of life,
had given up all pilotage, and resigned themselves to the destructive force of
ungoverned winds. Like a few furrows of unreaped corn, which, left standing on
a wide field after the rest is gathered to the garner, are swiftly borne down
by the winter storm. Like a few straggling swallows, which, remaining after
their fellows had, on the first unkind breath of passing autumn, migrated to
genial climes, were struck to earth by the first frost of November. Like a
stray sheep that wanders over the sleet-beaten hill-side, while the flock is in
the pen, and dies before morning-dawn. Like a cloud, like one of many that were
spread in impenetrable woof over the sky, which, when the shepherd north has
driven its companions “to drink Antipodean noon,” fades and
dissolves in the clear ether—Such were we!


We left the fair margin of the beauteous lake of Geneva, and entered the Alpine
ravines; tracing to its source the brawling Arve, through the rock-bound valley
of Servox, beside the mighty waterfalls, and under the shadow of the
inaccessible mountains, we travelled on; while the luxuriant walnut-tree gave
place to the dark pine, whose musical branches swung in the wind, and whose
upright forms had braved a thousand storms—till the verdant sod, the
flowery dell, and shrubbery hill were exchanged for the sky-piercing,
untrodden, seedless rock, “the bones of the world, waiting to be clothed
with every thing necessary to give life and beauty.”[25]
Strange that we should seek shelter here! Surely, if, in those countries where
earth was wont, like a tender mother, to nourish her children, we had found her
a destroyer, we need not seek it here, where stricken by keen penury she seems
to shudder through her stony veins. Nor were we mistaken in our conjecture. We
vainly sought the vast and ever moving glaciers of Chamounix, rifts of pendant
ice, seas of congelated waters, the leafless groves of tempest-battered pines,
dells, mere paths for the loud avalanche, and hill-tops, the resort of
thunder-storms. Pestilence reigned paramount even here. By the time that day
and night, like twin sisters of equal growth, shared equally their dominion
over the hours, one by one, beneath the ice-caves, beside the waters springing
from the thawed snows of a thousand winters, another and yet another of the
remnant of the race of Man, closed their eyes for ever to the light.


Yet we were not quite wrong in seeking a scene like this, whereon to close the
drama. Nature, true to the last, consoled us in the very heart of misery.
Sublime grandeur of outward objects soothed our hapless hearts, and were in
harmony with our desolation. Many sorrows have befallen man during his
chequered course; and many a woe-stricken mourner has found himself sole
survivor among many. Our misery took its majestic shape and colouring from the
vast ruin, that accompanied and made one with it. Thus on lovely earth, many a
dark ravine contains a brawling stream, shadowed by romantic rocks, threaded by
mossy paths—but all, except this, wanted the mighty back-ground, the
towering Alps, whose snowy capes, or bared ridges, lifted us from our dull
mortal abode, to the palaces of Nature’s own.


This solemn harmony of event and situation regulated our feelings, and gave as
it were fitting costume to our last act. Majestic gloom and tragic pomp
attended the decease of wretched humanity. The funeral procession of monarchs
of old, was transcended by our splendid shews. Near the sources of the Arveiron
we performed the rites for, four only excepted, the last of the species. Adrian
and I, leaving Clara and Evelyn wrapt in peaceful unobserving slumber, carried
the body to this desolate spot, and placed it in those caves of ice beneath the
glacier, which rive and split with the slightest sound, and bring destruction
on those within the clefts—no bird or beast of prey could here profane
the frozen form. So, with hushed steps and in silence, we placed the dead on a
bier of ice, and then, departing, stood on the rocky platform beside the river
springs. All hushed as we had been, the very striking of the air with our
persons had sufficed to disturb the repose of this thawless region; and we had
hardly left the cavern, before vast blocks of ice, detaching themselves from
the roof, fell, and covered the human image we had deposited within. We had
chosen a fair moonlight night, but our journey thither had been long, and the
crescent sank behind the western heights by the time we had accomplished our
purpose. The snowy mountains and blue glaciers shone in their own light. The
rugged and abrupt ravine, which formed one side of Mont Anvert, was opposite to
us, the glacier at our side; at our feet Arveiron, white and foaming, dashed
over the pointed rocks that jutted into it, and, with whirring spray and
ceaseless roar, disturbed the stilly night. Yellow lightnings played around the
vast dome of Mont Blanc, silent as the snow-clad rock they illuminated; all was
bare, wild, and sublime, while the singing of the pines in melodious murmurings
added a gentle interest to the rough magnificence. Now the riving and fall of
icy rocks clave the air; now the thunder of the avalanche burst on our ears. In
countries whose features are of less magnitude, nature betrays her living
powers in the foliage of the trees, in the growth of herbage, in the soft
purling of meandering streams; here, endowed with giant attributes, the
torrent, the thunder-storm, and the flow of massive waters, display her
activity. Such the church-yard, such the requiem, such the eternal
congregation, that waited on our companion’s funeral!


Nor was it the human form alone which we had placed in this eternal sepulchre,
whose obsequies we now celebrated. With this last victim Plague vanished from
the earth. Death had never wanted weapons wherewith to destroy life, and we,
few and weak as we had become, were still exposed to every other shaft with
which his full quiver teemed. But pestilence was absent from among them. For
seven years it had had full sway upon earth; she had trod every nook of our
spacious globe; she had mingled with the atmosphere, which as a cloak enwraps
all our fellow-creatures—the inhabitants of native Europe—the
luxurious Asiatic—the swarthy African and free American had been
vanquished and destroyed by her. Her barbarous tyranny came to its close here
in the rocky vale of Chamounix.


Still recurring scenes of misery and pain, the fruits of this distemper, made
no more a part of our lives—the word plague no longer rung in our
ears—the aspect of plague incarnate in the human countenance no longer
appeared before our eyes. From this moment I saw plague no more. She abdicated
her throne, and despoiled herself of her imperial sceptre among the ice rocks
that surrounded us. She left solitude and silence co-heirs of her kingdom.


My present feelings are so mingled with the past, that I cannot say whether the
knowledge of this change visited us, as we stood on this sterile spot. It seems
to me that it did; that a cloud seemed to pass from over us, that a weight was
taken from the air; that henceforth we breathed more freely, and raised our
heads with some portion of former liberty. Yet we did not hope. We were
impressed by the sentiment, that our race was run, but that plague would not be
our destroyer. The coming time was as a mighty river, down which a charmed boat
is driven, whose mortal steersman knows, that the obvious peril is not the one
he needs fear, yet that danger is nigh; and who floats awe-struck under
beetling precipices, through the dark and turbid waters—seeing in the
distance yet stranger and ruder shapes, towards which he is irresistibly
impelled. What would become of us? O for some Delphic oracle, or Pythian maid,
to utter the secrets of futurity! O for some Œdipus to solve the riddle of the
cruel Sphynx! Such Œdipus was I to be—not divining a word’s
juggle, but whose agonizing pangs, and sorrow-tainted life were to be the
engines, wherewith to lay bare the secrets of destiny, and reveal the meaning
of the enigma, whose explanation closed the history of the human race.


Dim fancies, akin to these, haunted our minds, and instilled feelings not
unallied to pleasure, as we stood beside this silent tomb of nature, reared by
these lifeless mountains, above her living veins, choking her vital principle.
“Thus are we left,” said Adrian, “two melancholy blasted
trees, where once a forest waved. We are left to mourn, and pine, and die. Yet
even now we have our duties, which we must string ourselves to fulfil: the duty
of bestowing pleasure where we can, and by force of love, irradiating with
rainbow hues the tempest of grief. Nor will I repine if in this extremity we
preserve what we now possess. Something tells me, Verney, that we need no
longer dread our cruel enemy, and I cling with delight to the oracular voice.
Though strange, it will be sweet to mark the growth of your little boy, and the
development of Clara’s young heart. In the midst of a desert world, we
are everything to them; and, if we live, it must be our task to make this new
mode of life happy to them. At present this is easy, for their childish ideas
do not wander into futurity, and the stinging craving for sympathy, and all of
love of which our nature is susceptible, is not yet awake within them: we
cannot guess what will happen then, when nature asserts her indefeasible and
sacred powers; but, long before that time, we may all be cold, as he who lies
in yonder tomb of ice. We need only provide for the present, and endeavour to
fill with pleasant images the inexperienced fancy of your lovely niece. The
scenes which now surround us, vast and sublime as they are, are not such as can
best contribute to this work. Nature is here like our fortunes, grand, but too
destructive, bare, and rude, to be able to afford delight to her young
imagination. Let us descend to the sunny plains of Italy. Winter will soon be
here, to clothe this wilderness in double desolation; but we will cross the
bleak hill-tops, and lead her to scenes of fertility and beauty, where her path
will be adorned with flowers, and the cheery atmosphere inspire pleasure and
hope.”


In pursuance of this plan we quitted Chamounix on the following day. We had no
cause to hasten our steps; no event was transacted beyond our actual sphere to
enchain our resolves, so we yielded to every idle whim, and deemed our time
well spent, when we could behold the passage of the hours without dismay. We
loitered along the lovely Vale of Servox; passed long hours on the bridge,
which, crossing the ravine of Arve, commands a prospect of its pine-clothed
depths, and the snowy mountains that wall it in. We rambled through romantic
Switzerland; till, fear of coming winter leading us forward, the first days of
October found us in the valley of La Maurienne, which leads to Cenis. I cannot
explain the reluctance we felt at leaving this land of mountains; perhaps it
was, that we regarded the Alps as boundaries between our former and our future
state of existence, and so clung fondly to what of old we had loved. Perhaps,
because we had now so few impulses urging to a choice between two modes of
action, we were pleased to preserve the existence of one, and preferred the
prospect of what we were to do, to the recollection of what had been done. We
felt that for this year danger was past; and we believed that, for some months,
we were secured to each other. There was a thrilling, agonizing delight in the
thought—it filled the eyes with misty tears, it tore the heart with
tumultuous heavings; frailer than the “snow fall in the river,”
were we each and all—but we strove to give life and individuality to the
meteoric course of our several existences, and to feel that no moment escaped
us unenjoyed. Thus tottering on the dizzy brink, we were happy. Yes! as we sat
beneath the toppling rocks, beside the waterfalls, near


—Forests, ancient as the hills,
And folding sunny spots of greenery,


where the chamois grazed, and the timid squirrel laid up its
hoard—descanting on the charms of nature, drinking in the while her
unalienable beauties—we were, in an empty world, happy.


Yet, O days of joy—days, when eye spoke to eye, and voices, sweeter than
the music of the swinging branches of the pines, or rivulet’s gentle
murmur, answered mine—yet, O days replete with beatitude, days of loved
society—days unutterably dear to me forlorn—pass, O pass before me,
making me in your memory forget what I am. Behold, how my streaming eyes blot
this senseless paper—behold, how my features are convulsed by agonizing
throes, at your mere recollection, now that, alone, my tears flow, my lips
quiver, my cries fill the air, unseen, unmarked, unheard! Yet, O yet, days of
delight! let me dwell on your long-drawn hours!


As the cold increased upon us, we passed the Alps, and descended into Italy. At
the uprising of morn, we sat at our repast, and cheated our regrets by gay
sallies or learned disquisitions. The live-long day we sauntered on, still
keeping in view the end of our journey, but careless of the hour of its
completion. As the evening star shone out, and the orange sunset, far in the
west, marked the position of the dear land we had for ever left, talk, thought
enchaining, made the hours fly—O that we had lived thus for ever and for
ever! Of what consequence was it to our four hearts, that they alone were the
fountains of life in the wide world? As far as mere individual sentiment was
concerned, we had rather be left thus united together, than if, each alone in a
populous desert of unknown men, we had wandered truly companionless till
life’s last term. In this manner, we endeavoured to console each other;
in this manner, true philosophy taught us to reason.


It was the delight of Adrian and myself to wait on Clara, naming her the little
queen of the world, ourselves her humblest servitors. When we arrived at a
town, our first care was to select for her its most choice abode; to make sure
that no harrowing relic remained of its former inhabitants; to seek food for
her, and minister to her wants with assiduous tenderness. Clara entered into
our scheme with childish gaiety. Her chief business was to attend on Evelyn;
but it was her sport to array herself in splendid robes, adorn herself with
sunny gems, and ape a princely state. Her religion, deep and pure, did not
teach her to refuse to blunt thus the keen sting of regret; her youthful
vivacity made her enter, heart and soul, into these strange masquerades.


We had resolved to pass the ensuing winter at Milan, which, as being a large
and luxurious city, would afford us choice of homes. We had descended the Alps,
and left far behind their vast forests and mighty crags. We entered smiling
Italy. Mingled grass and corn grew in her plains, the unpruned vines threw
their luxuriant branches around the elms. The grapes, overripe, had fallen on
the ground, or hung purple, or burnished green, among the red and yellow
leaves. The ears of standing corn winnowed to emptiness by the spendthrift
winds; the fallen foliage of the trees, the weed-grown brooks, the dusky olive,
now spotted with its blackened fruit; the chestnuts, to which the squirrel only
was harvest-man; all plenty, and yet, alas! all poverty, painted in wondrous
hues and fantastic groupings this land of beauty. In the towns, in the
voiceless towns, we visited the churches, adorned by pictures, master-pieces of
art, or galleries of statues—while in this genial clime the animals, in
new found liberty, rambled through the gorgeous palaces, and hardly feared our
forgotten aspect. The dove-coloured oxen turned their full eyes on us, and
paced slowly by; a startling throng of silly sheep, with pattering feet, would
start up in some chamber, formerly dedicated to the repose of beauty, and rush,
huddling past us, down the marble staircase into the street, and again in at
the first open door, taking unrebuked possession of hallowed sanctuary, or
kingly council-chamber. We no longer started at these occurrences, nor at worse
exhibition of change—when the palace had become a mere tomb, pregnant
with fetid stench, strewn with the dead; and we could perceive how pestilence
and fear had played strange antics, chasing the luxurious dame to the dank
fields and bare cottage; gathering, among carpets of Indian woof, and beds of
silk, the rough peasant, or the deformed half-human shape of the wretched
beggar.


We arrived at Milan, and stationed ourselves in the Vice-Roy’s palace.
Here we made laws for ourselves, dividing our day, and fixing distinct
occupations for each hour. In the morning we rode in the adjoining country, or
wandered through the palaces, in search of pictures or antiquities. In the
evening we assembled to read or to converse. There were few books that we dared
read; few, that did not cruelly deface the painting we bestowed on our
solitude, by recalling combinations and emotions never more to be experienced
by us. Metaphysical disquisition; fiction, which wandering from all reality,
lost itself in self-created errors; poets of times so far gone by, that to read
of them was as to read of Atlantis and Utopia; or such as referred to nature
only, and the workings of one particular mind; but most of all, talk, varied
and ever new, beguiled our hours.


While we paused thus in our onward career towards death, time held on its
accustomed course. Still and for ever did the earth roll on, enthroned in her
atmospheric car, speeded by the force of the invisible coursers of never-erring
necessity. And now, this dew-drop in the sky, this ball, ponderous with
mountains, lucent with waves, passing from the short tyranny of watery Pisces
and the frigid Ram, entered the radiant demesne of Taurus and the Twins. There,
fanned by vernal airs, the Spirit of Beauty sprung from her cold repose; and,
with winnowing wings and soft pacing feet, set a girdle of verdure around the
earth, sporting among the violets, hiding within the springing foliage of the
trees, tripping lightly down the radiant streams into the sunny deep.
“For lo! winter is past, the rain is over and gone; the flowers appear on
the earth, the time of the singing of birds is come, and the voice of the
turtle is heard in our land; the fig tree putteth forth her green figs, and the
vines, with the tender grape, give a good
smell.”[26] Thus was it in
the time of the ancient regal poet; thus was it now.


Yet how could we miserable hail the approach of this delightful season? We
hoped indeed that death did not now as heretofore walk in its shadow; yet, left
as we were alone to each other, we looked in each other’s faces with
enquiring eyes, not daring altogether to trust to our presentiments, and
endeavouring to divine which would be the hapless survivor to the other three.
We were to pass the summer at the lake of Como, and thither we removed as soon
as spring grew to her maturity, and the snow disappeared from the hill tops.
Ten miles from Como, under the steep heights of the eastern mountains, by the
margin of the lake, was a villa called the Pliniana, from its being built on
the site of a fountain, whose periodical ebb and flow is described by the
younger Pliny in his letters. The house had nearly fallen into ruin, till in
the year 2090, an English nobleman had bought it, and fitted it up with every
luxury. Two large halls, hung with splendid tapestry, and paved with marble,
opened on each side of a court, of whose two other sides one overlooked the
deep dark lake, and the other was bounded by a mountain, from whose stony side
gushed, with roar and splash, the celebrated fountain. Above, underwood of
myrtle and tufts of odorous plants crowned the rock, while the star-pointing
giant cypresses reared themselves in the blue air, and the recesses of the
hills were adorned with the luxuriant growth of chestnut-trees. Here we fixed
our summer residence. We had a lovely skiff, in which we sailed, now stemming
the midmost waves, now coasting the over-hanging and craggy banks, thick sown
with evergreens, which dipped their shining leaves in the waters, and were
mirrored in many a little bay and creek of waters of translucent darkness. Here
orange plants bloomed, here birds poured forth melodious hymns; and here,
during spring, the cold snake emerged from the clefts, and basked on the sunny
terraces of rock.


Were we not happy in this paradisiacal retreat? If some kind spirit had
whispered forgetfulness to us, methinks we should have been happy here, where
the precipitous mountains, nearly pathless, shut from our view the far fields
of desolate earth, and with small exertion of the imagination, we might fancy
that the cities were still resonant with popular hum, and the peasant still
guided his plough through the furrow, and that we, the world’s free
denizens, enjoyed a voluntary exile, and not a remediless cutting off from our
extinct species.


Not one among us enjoyed the beauty of this scenery so much as Clara. Before we
quitted Milan, a change had taken place in her habits and manners. She lost her
gaiety, she laid aside her sports, and assumed an almost vestal plainness of
attire. She shunned us, retiring with Evelyn to some distant chamber or silent
nook; nor did she enter into his pastimes with the same zest as she was wont,
but would sit and watch him with sadly tender smiles, and eyes bright with
tears, yet without a word of complaint. She approached us timidly, avoided our
caresses, nor shook off her embarrassment till some serious discussion or lofty
theme called her for awhile out of herself. Her beauty grew as a rose, which,
opening to the summer wind, discloses leaf after leaf till the sense aches with
its excess of loveliness. A slight and variable colour tinged her cheeks, and
her motions seemed attuned by some hidden harmony of surpassing sweetness. We
redoubled our tenderness and earnest attentions. She received them with
grateful smiles, that fled swift as sunny beam from a glittering wave on an
April day.


Our only acknowledged point of sympathy with her, appeared to be Evelyn. This
dear little fellow was a comforter and delight to us beyond all words. His
buoyant spirit, and his innocent ignorance of our vast calamity, were balm to
us, whose thoughts and feelings were over-wrought and spun out in the immensity
of speculative sorrow. To cherish, to caress, to amuse him was the common task
of all. Clara, who felt towards him in some degree like a young mother,
gratefully acknowledged our kindness towards him. To me, O! to me, who saw the
clear brows and soft eyes of the beloved of my heart, my lost and ever dear
Idris, re-born in his gentle face, to me he was dear even to pain; if I pressed
him to my heart, methought I clasped a real and living part of her, who had
lain there through long years of youthful happiness.


It was the custom of Adrian and myself to go out each day in our skiff to
forage in the adjacent country. In these expeditions we were seldom accompanied
by Clara or her little charge, but our return was an hour of hilarity. Evelyn
ransacked our stores with childish eagerness, and we always brought some new
found gift for our fair companion. Then too we made discoveries of lovely
scenes or gay palaces, whither in the evening we all proceeded. Our sailing
expeditions were most divine, and with a fair wind or transverse course we cut
the liquid waves; and, if talk failed under the pressure of thought, I had my
clarionet with me, which awoke the echoes, and gave the change to our careful
minds. Clara at such times often returned to her former habits of free converse
and gay sally; and though our four hearts alone beat in the world, those four
hearts were happy.


One day, on our return from the town of Como, with a laden boat, we expected as
usual to be met at the port by Clara and Evelyn, and we were somewhat surprised
to see the beach vacant. I, as my nature prompted, would not prognosticate
evil, but explained it away as a mere casual incident. Not so Adrian. He was
seized with sudden trembling and apprehension, and he called to me with
vehemence to steer quickly for land, and, when near, leapt from the boat, half
falling into the water; and, scrambling up the steep bank, hastened along the
narrow strip of garden, the only level space between the lake and the mountain.
I followed without delay; the garden and inner court were empty, so was the
house, whose every room we visited. Adrian called loudly upon Clara’s
name, and was about to rush up the near mountain-path, when the door of a
summer-house at the end of the garden slowly opened, and Clara appeared, not
advancing towards us, but leaning against a column of the building with
blanched cheeks, in a posture of utter despondency. Adrian sprang towards her
with a cry of joy, and folded her delightedly in his arms. She withdrew from
his embrace, and, without a word, again entered the summer-house. Her quivering
lips, her despairing heart refused to afford her voice to express our
misfortune. Poor little Evelyn had, while playing with her, been seized with
sudden fever, and now lay torpid and speechless on a little couch in the
summer-house.


For a whole fortnight we unceasingly watched beside the poor child, as his life
declined under the ravages of a virulent typhus. His little form and tiny
lineaments encaged the embryo of the world-spanning mind of man. Man’s
nature, brimful of passions and affections, would have had an home in that
little heart, whose swift pulsations hurried towards their close. His small
hand’s fine mechanism, now flaccid and unbent, would in the growth of
sinew and muscle, have achieved works of beauty or of strength. His tender rosy
feet would have trod in firm manhood the bowers and glades of earth—
these reflections were now of little use: he lay, thought and strength
suspended, waiting unresisting the final blow.


We watched at his bedside, and when the access of fever was on him, we neither
spoke nor looked at each other, marking only his obstructed breath and the
mortal glow that tinged his sunken cheek, the heavy death that weighed on his
eyelids. It is a trite evasion to say, that words could not express our long
drawn agony; yet how can words image sensations, whose tormenting keenness
throw us back, as it were, on the deep roots and hidden foundations of our
nature, which shake our being with earth-quake-throe, so that we leave to
confide in accustomed feelings which like mother-earth support us, and cling to
some vain imagination or deceitful hope, which will soon be buried in the ruins
occasioned by the final shock. I have called that period a fortnight, which we
passed watching the changes of the sweet child’s malady—and such it
might have been—at night, we wondered to find another day gone, while
each particular hour seemed endless. Day and night were exchanged for one
another uncounted; we slept hardly at all, nor did we even quit his room,
except when a pang of grief seized us, and we retired from each other for a
short period to conceal our sobs and tears. We endeavoured in vain to abstract
Clara from this deplorable scene. She sat, hour after hour, looking at him, now
softly arranging his pillow, and, while he had power to swallow, administered
his drink. At length the moment of his death came: the blood paused in its flow
—his eyes opened, and then closed again: without convulsion or sigh, the
frail tenement was left vacant of its spiritual inhabitant.


I have heard that the sight of the dead has confirmed materialists in their
belief. I ever felt otherwise. Was that my child—that moveless decaying
inanimation? My child was enraptured by my caresses; his dear voice cloathed
with meaning articulations his thoughts, otherwise inaccessible; his smile was
a ray of the soul, and the same soul sat upon its throne in his eyes. I turn
from this mockery of what he was. Take, O earth, thy debt! freely and for ever
I consign to thee the garb thou didst afford. But thou, sweet child, amiable
and beloved boy, either thy spirit has sought a fitter dwelling, or, shrined in
my heart, thou livest while it lives.


We placed his remains under a cypress, the upright mountain being scooped out
to receive them. And then Clara said, “If you wish me to live, take me
from hence. There is something in this scene of transcendent beauty, in these
trees, and hills and waves, that for ever whisper to me, leave thy cumbrous
flesh, and make a part of us. I earnestly entreat you to take me away.”


So on the fifteenth of August we bade adieu to our villa, and the embowering
shades of this abode of beauty; to calm bay and noisy waterfall; to
Evelyn’s little grave we bade farewell! and then, with heavy hearts, we
departed on our pilgrimage towards Rome.


 [25]
Mary Wollstonecraft’s Letters from Norway.


 [26]
Solomon’s Song.

</div></body></text></TEI>