<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="12">
CHAPTER X.

After these events, it was long before we were able to attain any degree of
composure. A moral tempest had wrecked our richly freighted vessel, and we,
remnants of the diminished crew, were aghast at the losses and changes which we
had undergone. Idris passionately loved her brother, and could ill brook an
absence whose duration was uncertain; his society was dear and necessary to
me—I had followed up my chosen literary occupations with delight under
his tutorship and assistance; his mild philosophy, unerring reason, and
enthusiastic friendship were the best ingredient, the exalted spirit of our
circle; even the children bitterly regretted the loss of their kind playfellow.
Deeper grief oppressed Perdita. In spite of resentment, by day and night she
figured to herself the toils and dangers of the wanderers. Raymond absent,
struggling with difficulties, lost to the power and rank of the Protectorate,
exposed to the perils of war, became an object of anxious interest; not that
she felt any inclination to recall him, if recall must imply a return to their
former union. Such return she felt to be impossible; and while she believed it
to be thus, and with anguish regretted that so it should be, she continued
angry and impatient with him, who occasioned her misery. These perplexities and
regrets caused her to bathe her pillow with nightly tears, and to reduce her in
person and in mind to the shadow of what she had been. She sought solitude, and
avoided us when in gaiety and unrestrained affection we met in a family circle.
Lonely musings, interminable wanderings, and solemn music were her only
pastimes. She neglected even her child; shutting her heart against all
tenderness, she grew reserved towards me, her first and fast friend.


I could not see her thus lost, without exerting myself to remedy the evil
—remediless I knew, if I could not in the end bring her to reconcile
herself to Raymond. Before he went I used every argument, every persuasion to
induce her to stop his journey. She answered the one with a gush of
tears—telling me that to be persuaded—life and the goods of life
were a cheap exchange. It was not will that she wanted, but the capacity; again
and again she declared, it were as easy to enchain the sea, to put reins on the
wind’s viewless courses, as for her to take truth for falsehood, deceit
for honesty, heartless communion for sincere, confiding love. She answered my
reasonings more briefly, declaring with disdain, that the reason was hers; and,
until I could persuade her that the past could be unacted, that maturity could
go back to the cradle, and that all that was could become as though it had
never been, it was useless to assure her that no real change had taken place in
her fate. And thus with stern pride she suffered him to go, though her very
heart-strings cracked at the fulfilling of the act, which rent from her all
that made life valuable.


To change the scene for her, and even for ourselves, all unhinged by the cloud
that had come over us, I persuaded my two remaining companions that it were
better that we should absent ourselves for a time from Windsor. We visited the
north of England, my native Ulswater, and lingered in scenes dear from a
thousand associations. We lengthened our tour into Scotland, that we might see
Loch Katrine and Loch Lomond; thence we crossed to Ireland, and passed several
weeks in the neighbourhood of Killarney. The change of scene operated to a
great degree as I expected; after a year’s absence, Perdita returned in
gentler and more docile mood to Windsor. The first sight of this place for a
time unhinged her. Here every spot was distinct with associations now grown
bitter. The forest glades, the ferny dells, and lawny uplands, the cultivated
and cheerful country spread around the silver pathway of ancient Thames, all
earth, air, and wave, took up one choral voice, inspired by memory, instinct
with plaintive regret.


But my essay towards bringing her to a saner view of her own situation, did not
end here. Perdita was still to a great degree uneducated. When first she left
her peasant life, and resided with the elegant and cultivated Evadne, the only
accomplishment she brought to any perfection was that of painting, for which
she had a taste almost amounting to genius. This had occupied her in her lonely
cottage, when she quitted her Greek friend’s protection. Her pallet and
easel were now thrown aside; did she try to paint, thronging recollections made
her hand tremble, her eyes fill with tears. With this occupation she gave up
almost every other; and her mind preyed upon itself almost to madness.


For my own part, since Adrian had first withdrawn me from my selvatic
wilderness to his own paradise of order and beauty, I had been wedded to
literature. I felt convinced that however it might have been in former times,
in the present stage of the world, no man’s faculties could be developed,
no man’s moral principle be enlarged and liberal, without an extensive
acquaintance with books. To me they stood in the place of an active career, of
ambition, and those palpable excitements necessary to the multitude. The
collation of philosophical opinions, the study of historical facts, the
acquirement of languages, were at once my recreation, and the serious aim of my
life. I turned author myself. My productions however were sufficiently
unpretending; they were confined to the biography of favourite historical
characters, especially those whom I believed to have been traduced, or about
whom clung obscurity and doubt.


As my authorship increased, I acquired new sympathies and pleasures. I found
another and a valuable link to enchain me to my fellow-creatures; my point of
sight was extended, and the inclinations and capacities of all human beings
became deeply interesting to me. Kings have been called the fathers of their
people. Suddenly I became as it were the father of all mankind. Posterity
became my heirs. My thoughts were gems to enrich the treasure house of
man’s intellectual possessions; each sentiment was a precious gift I
bestowed on them. Let not these aspirations be attributed to vanity. They were
not expressed in words, nor even reduced to form in my own mind; but they
filled my soul, exalting my thoughts, raising a glow of enthusiasm, and led me
out of the obscure path in which I before walked, into the bright
noon-enlightened highway of mankind, making me, citizen of the world, a
candidate for immortal honors, an eager aspirant to the praise and sympathy of
my fellow men.


No one certainly ever enjoyed the pleasures of composition more intensely than
I. If I left the woods, the solemn music of the waving branches, and the
majestic temple of nature, I sought the vast halls of the Castle, and looked
over wide, fertile England, spread beneath our regal mount, and listened the
while to inspiring strains of music. At such times solemn harmonies or
spirit-stirring airs gave wings to my lagging thoughts, permitting them,
methought, to penetrate the last veil of nature and her God, and to display the
highest beauty in visible expression to the understandings of men. As the music
went on, my ideas seemed to quit their mortal dwelling house; they shook their
pinions and began a flight, sailing on the placid current of thought, filling
the creation with new glory, and rousing sublime imagery that else had slept
voiceless. Then I would hasten to my desk, weave the new-found web of mind in
firm texture and brilliant colours, leaving the fashioning of the material to a
calmer moment.


But this account, which might as properly belong to a former period of my life
as to the present moment, leads me far afield. It was the pleasure I took in
literature, the discipline of mind I found arise from it, that made me eager to
lead Perdita to the same pursuits. I began with light hand and gentle
allurement; first exciting her curiosity, and then satisfying it in such a way
as might occasion her, at the same time that she half forgot her sorrows in
occupation, to find in the hours that succeeded a reaction of benevolence and
toleration.


Intellectual activity, though not directed towards books, had always been my
sister’s characteristic. It had been displayed early in life, leading her
out to solitary musing among her native mountains, causing her to form
innumerous combinations from common objects, giving strength to her
perceptions, and swiftness to their arrangement. Love had come, as the rod of
the master-prophet, to swallow up every minor propensity. Love had doubled all
her excellencies, and placed a diadem on her genius. Was she to cease to love?
Take the colours and odour from the rose, change the sweet nutriment of
mother’s milk to gall and poison; as easily might you wean Perdita from
love. She grieved for the loss of Raymond with an anguish, that exiled all
smile from her lips, and trenched sad lines on her brow of beauty. But each day
seemed to change the nature of her suffering, and every succeeding hour forced
her to alter (if so I may style it) the fashion of her soul’s mourning
garb. For a time music was able to satisfy the cravings of her mental hunger,
and her melancholy thoughts renewed themselves in each change of key, and
varied with every alteration in the strain. My schooling first impelled her
towards books; and, if music had been the food of sorrow, the productions of
the wise became its medicine. The acquisition of unknown languages was too
tedious an occupation, for one who referred every expression to the universe
within, and read not, as many do, for the mere sake of filling up time; but who
was still questioning herself and her author, moulding every idea in a thousand
ways, ardently desirous for the discovery of truth in every sentence. She
sought to improve her understanding; mechanically her heart and dispositions
became soft and gentle under this benign discipline. After awhile she
discovered, that amidst all her newly acquired knowledge, her own character,
which formerly she fancied that she thoroughly understood, became the first in
rank among the terrae incognitae, the pathless wilds of a country that had no
chart. Erringly and strangely she began the task of self-examination with
self-condemnation. And then again she became aware of her own excellencies, and
began to balance with juster scales the shades of good and evil. I, who longed
beyond words, to restore her to the happiness it was still in her power to
enjoy, watched with anxiety the result of these internal proceedings.


But man is a strange animal. We cannot calculate on his forces like that of an
engine; and, though an impulse draw with a forty-horse power at what appears
willing to yield to one, yet in contempt of calculation the movement is not
effected. Neither grief, philosophy, nor love could make Perdita think with
mildness of the dereliction of Raymond. She now took pleasure in my society;
towards Idris she felt and displayed a full and affectionate sense of her
worth—she restored to her child in abundant measure her tenderness and
care. But I could discover, amidst all her repinings, deep resentment towards
Raymond, and an unfading sense of injury, that plucked from me my hope, when I
appeared nearest to its fulfilment. Among other painful restrictions, she has
occasioned it to become a law among us, never to mention Raymond’s name
before her. She refused to read any communications from Greece, desiring me
only to mention when any arrived, and whether the wanderers were well. It was
curious that even little Clara observed this law towards her mother. This
lovely child was nearly eight years of age. Formerly she had been a
light-hearted infant, fanciful, but gay and childish. After the departure of
her father, thought became impressed on her young brow. Children, unadepts in
language, seldom find words to express their thoughts, nor could we tell in
what manner the late events had impressed themselves on her mind. But certainly
she had made deep observations while she noted in silence the changes that
passed around her. She never mentioned her father to Perdita, she appeared half
afraid when she spoke of him to me, and though I tried to draw her out on the
subject, and to dispel the gloom that hung about her ideas concerning him, I
could not succeed. Yet each foreign post-day she watched for the arrival of
letters—knew the post mark, and watched me as I read. I found her often
poring over the article of Greek intelligence in the newspaper.


There is no more painful sight than that of untimely care in children, and it
was particularly observable in one whose disposition had heretofore been
mirthful. Yet there was so much sweetness and docility about Clara, that your
admiration was excited; and if the moods of mind are calculated to paint the
cheek with beauty, and endow motions with grace, surely her contemplations must
have been celestial; since every lineament was moulded into loveliness, and her
motions were more harmonious than the elegant boundings of the fawns of her
native forest. I sometimes expostulated with Perdita on the subject of her
reserve; but she rejected my counsels, while her daughter’s sensibility
excited in her a tenderness still more passionate.


After the lapse of more than a year, Adrian returned from Greece.


When our exiles had first arrived, a truce was in existence between the Turks
and Greeks; a truce that was as sleep to the mortal frame, signal of renewed
activity on waking. With the numerous soldiers of Asia, with all of warlike
stores, ships, and military engines, that wealth and power could command, the
Turks at once resolved to crush an enemy, which creeping on by degrees, had
from their stronghold in the Morea, acquired Thrace and Macedonia, and had led
their armies even to the gates of Constantinople, while their extensive
commercial relations gave every European nation an interest in their success.
Greece prepared for a vigorous resistance; it rose to a man; and the women,
sacrificing their costly ornaments, accoutred their sons for the war, and bade
them conquer or die with the spirit of the Spartan mother. The talents and
courage of Raymond were highly esteemed among the Greeks. Born at Athens, that
city claimed him for her own, and by giving him the command of her peculiar
division in the army, the commander-in-chief only possessed superior power. He
was numbered among her citizens, his name was added to the list of Grecian
heroes. His judgment, activity, and consummate bravery, justified their choice.
The Earl of Windsor became a volunteer under his friend.


“It is well,” said Adrian, “to prate of war in these pleasant
shades, and with much ill-spent oil make a show of joy, because many thousand
of our fellow-creatures leave with pain this sweet air and natal earth. I shall
not be suspected of being averse to the Greek cause; I know and feel its
necessity; it is beyond every other a good cause. I have defended it with my
sword, and was willing that my spirit should be breathed out in its defence;
freedom is of more worth than life, and the Greeks do well to defend their
privilege unto death. But let us not deceive ourselves. The Turks are men; each
fibre, each limb is as feeling as our own, and every spasm, be it mental or
bodily, is as truly felt in a Turk’s heart or brain, as in a
Greek’s. The last action at which I was present was the taking of
——. The Turks resisted to the last, the garrison perished on the
ramparts, and we entered by assault. Every breathing creature within the walls
was massacred. Think you, amidst the shrieks of violated innocence and helpless
infancy, I did not feel in every nerve the cry of a fellow being? They were men
and women, the sufferers, before they were Mahometans, and when they rise
turbanless from the grave, in what except their good or evil actions will they
be the better or worse than we? Two soldiers contended for a girl, whose rich
dress and extreme beauty excited the brutal appetites of these wretches, who,
perhaps good men among their families, were changed by the fury of the moment
into incarnated evils. An old man, with a silver beard, decrepid and bald, he
might be her grandfather, interposed to save her; the battle axe of one of them
clove his skull. I rushed to her defence, but rage made them blind and deaf;
they did not distinguish my Christian garb or heed my words—words were
blunt weapons then, for while war cried “havoc,” and murder gave
fit echo, how could I—


Turn back the tide of ills, relieving wrong
With mild accost of soothing eloquence?


One of the fellows, enraged at my interference, struck me with his bayonet in
the side, and I fell senseless.


“This wound will probably shorten my life, having shattered a frame, weak
of itself. But I am content to die. I have learnt in Greece that one man, more
or less, is of small import, while human bodies remain to fill up the thinned
ranks of the soldiery; and that the identity of an individual may be
overlooked, so that the muster roll contain its full numbers. All this has a
different effect upon Raymond. He is able to contemplate the ideal of war,
while I am sensible only to its realities. He is a soldier, a general. He can
influence the blood-thirsty war-dogs, while I resist their propensities vainly.
The cause is simple. Burke has said that, ‘in all bodies those who would
lead, must also, in a considerable degree, follow.’ —I cannot
follow; for I do not sympathize in their dreams of massacre and glory—to
follow and to lead in such a career, is the natural bent of Raymond’s
mind. He is always successful, and bids fair, at the same time that he acquires
high name and station for himself, to secure liberty, probably extended empire,
to the Greeks.”


Perdita’s mind was not softened by this account. He, she thought, can be
great and happy without me. Would that I also had a career! Would that I could
freight some untried bark with all my hopes, energies, and desires, and launch
it forth into the ocean of life—bound for some attainable point, with
ambition or pleasure at the helm! But adverse winds detain me on shore; like
Ulysses, I sit at the water’s edge and weep. But my nerveless hands can
neither fell the trees, nor smooth the planks. Under the influence of these
melancholy thoughts, she became more than ever in love with sorrow. Yet
Adrian’s presence did some good; he at once broke through the law of
silence observed concerning Raymond. At first she started from the unaccustomed
sound; soon she got used to it and to love it, and she listened with avidity to
the account of his achievements. Clara got rid also of her restraint; Adrian
and she had been old playfellows; and now, as they walked or rode together, he
yielded to her earnest entreaty, and repeated, for the hundredth time, some
tale of her father’s bravery, munificence, or justice.


Each vessel in the mean time brought exhilarating tidings from Greece. The
presence of a friend in its armies and councils made us enter into the details
with enthusiasm; and a short letter now and then from Raymond told us how he
was engrossed by the interests of his adopted country. The Greeks were strongly
attached to their commercial pursuits, and would have been satisfied with their
present acquisitions, had not the Turks roused them by invasion. The patriots
were victorious; a spirit of conquest was instilled; and already they looked on
Constantinople as their own. Raymond rose perpetually in their estimation; but
one man held a superior command to him in their armies. He was conspicuous for
his conduct and choice of position in a battle fought in the plains of Thrace,
on the banks of the Hebrus, which was to decide the fate of Islam. The
Mahometans were defeated, and driven entirely from the country west of this
river. The battle was sanguinary, the loss of the Turks apparently irreparable;
the Greeks, in losing one man, forgot the nameless crowd strewed upon the
bloody field, and they ceased to value themselves on a victory, which cost
them— Raymond.


At the battle of Makri he had led the charge of cavalry, and pursued the
fugitives even to the banks of the Hebrus. His favourite horse was found
grazing by the margin of the tranquil river. It became a question whether he
had fallen among the unrecognized; but no broken ornament or stained trapping
betrayed his fate. It was suspected that the Turks, finding themselves
possessed of so illustrious a captive, resolved to satisfy their cruelty rather
than their avarice, and fearful of the interference of England, had come to the
determination of concealing for ever the cold-blooded murder of the soldier
they most hated and feared in the squadrons of their enemy.


Raymond was not forgotten in England. His abdication of the Protectorate had
caused an unexampled sensation; and, when his magnificent and manly system was
contrasted with the narrow views of succeeding politicians, the period of his
elevation was referred to with sorrow. The perpetual recurrence of his name,
joined to most honourable testimonials, in the Greek gazettes, kept up the
interest he had excited. He seemed the favourite child of fortune, and his
untimely loss eclipsed the world, and shewed forth the remnant of mankind with
diminished lustre. They clung with eagerness to the hope held out that he might
yet be alive. Their minister at Constantinople was urged to make the necessary
perquisitions, and should his existence be ascertained, to demand his release.
It was to be hoped that their efforts would succeed, and that though now a
prisoner, the sport of cruelty and the mark of hate, he would be rescued from
danger and restored to the happiness, power, and honour which he deserved.


The effect of this intelligence upon my sister was striking. She never for a
moment credited the story of his death; she resolved instantly to go to Greece.
Reasoning and persuasion were thrown away upon her; she would endure no
hindrance, no delay. It may be advanced for a truth, that, if argument or
entreaty can turn any one from a desperate purpose, whose motive and end
depends on the strength of the affections only, then it is right so to turn
them, since their docility shews, that neither the motive nor the end were of
sufficient force to bear them through the obstacles attendant on their
undertaking. If, on the contrary, they are proof against expostulation, this
very steadiness is an omen of success; and it becomes the duty of those who
love them, to assist in smoothing the obstructions in their path. Such
sentiments actuated our little circle. Finding Perdita immoveable, we consulted
as to the best means of furthering her purpose. She could not go alone to a
country where she had no friends, where she might arrive only to hear the
dreadful news, which must overwhelm her with grief and remorse. Adrian, whose
health had always been weak, now suffered considerable aggravation of suffering
from the effects of his wound. Idris could not endure to leave him in this
state; nor was it right either to quit or take with us a young family for a
journey of this description. I resolved at length to accompany Perdita. The
separation from my Idris was painful—but necessity reconciled us to it in
some degree: necessity and the hope of saving Raymond, and restoring him again
to happiness and Perdita. No delay was to ensue. Two days after we came to our
determination, we set out for Portsmouth, and embarked. The season was May, the
weather stormless; we were promised a prosperous voyage. Cherishing the most
fervent hopes, embarked on the waste ocean, we saw with delight the receding
shore of Britain, and on the wings of desire outspeeded our well filled sails
towards the South. The light curling waves bore us onward, and old ocean smiled
at the freight of love and hope committed to his charge; it stroked gently its
tempestuous plains, and the path was smoothed for us. Day and night the wind
right aft, gave steady impulse to our keel—nor did rough gale, or
treacherous sand, or destructive rock interpose an obstacle between my sister
and the land which was to restore her to her first beloved,


Her dear heart’s confessor—a heart within that heart.

</div></body></text></TEI>