<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="19">
CHAPTER VI.

I have lingered thus long on the extreme bank, the wasting shoal that stretched
into the stream of life, dallying with the shadow of death. Thus long, I have
cradled my heart in retrospection of past happiness, when hope was. Why not for
ever thus? I am not immortal; and the thread of my history might be spun out to
the limits of my existence. But the same sentiment that first led me to
pourtray scenes replete with tender recollections, now bids me hurry on. The
same yearning of this warm, panting heart, that has made me in written words
record my vagabond youth, my serene manhood, and the passions of my soul, makes
me now recoil from further delay. I must complete my work.


Here then I stand, as I said, beside the fleet waters of the flowing years, and
now away! Spread the sail, and strain with oar, hurrying by dark impending
crags, adown steep rapids, even to the sea of desolation I have reached. Yet
one moment, one brief interval before I put from shore— once, once again
let me fancy myself as I was in 2094 in my abode at Windsor, let me close my
eyes, and imagine that the immeasurable boughs of its oaks still shadow me, its
castle walls anear. Let fancy pourtray the joyous scene of the twentieth of
June, such as even now my aching heart recalls it.


Circumstances had called me to London; here I heard talk that symptoms of the
plague had occurred in hospitals of that city. I returned to Windsor; my brow
was clouded, my heart heavy; I entered the Little Park, as was my custom, at
the Frogmore gate, on my way to the Castle. A great part of these grounds had
been given to cultivation, and strips of potatoe-land and corn were scattered
here and there. The rooks cawed loudly in the trees above; mixed with their
hoarse cries I heard a lively strain of music. It was Alfred’s birthday.
The young people, the Etonians, and children of the neighbouring gentry, held a
mock fair, to which all the country people were invited. The park was speckled
by tents, whose flaunting colours and gaudy flags, waving in the sunshine,
added to the gaiety of the scene. On a platform erected beneath the terrace, a
number of the younger part of the assembly were dancing. I leaned against a
tree to observe them. The band played the wild eastern air of Weber introduced
in Abon Hassan; its volatile notes gave wings to the feet of the dancers, while
the lookers-on unconsciously beat time. At first the tripping measure lifted my
spirit with it, and for a moment my eyes gladly followed the mazes of the
dance. The revulsion of thought passed like keen steel to my heart. Ye are all
going to die, I thought; already your tomb is built up around you. Awhile,
because you are gifted with agility and strength, you fancy that you live: but
frail is the “bower of flesh” that encaskets life; dissoluble the
silver cord that binds you to it. The joyous soul, charioted from pleasure to
pleasure by the graceful mechanism of well-formed limbs, will suddenly feel the
axle-tree give way, and spring and wheel dissolve in dust. Not one of you, O!
fated crowd, can escape—not one! not my own ones! not my Idris and her
babes! Horror and misery! Already the gay dance vanished, the green sward was
strewn with corpses, the blue air above became fetid with deathly exhalations.
Shriek, ye clarions! ye loud trumpets, howl! Pile dirge on dirge; rouse the
funereal chords; let the air ring with dire wailing; let wild discord rush on
the wings of the wind! Already I hear it, while guardian angels, attendant on
humanity, their task achieved, hasten away, and their departure is announced by
melancholy strains; faces all unseemly with weeping, forced open my lids;
faster and faster many groups of these woe-begone countenances thronged around,
exhibiting every variety of wretchedness—well known faces mingled with
the distorted creations of fancy. Ashy pale, Raymond and Perdita sat apart,
looking on with sad smiles. Adrian’s countenance flitted across, tainted
by death—Idris, with eyes languidly closed and livid lips, was about to
slide into the wide grave. The confusion grew—their looks of sorrow
changed to mockery; they nodded their heads in time to the music, whose clang
became maddening.


I felt that this was insanity—I sprang forward to throw it off; I rushed
into the midst of the crowd. Idris saw me: with light step she advanced; as I
folded her in my arms, feeling, as I did, that I thus enclosed what was to me a
world, yet frail as the waterdrop which the noon-day sun will drink from the
water lily’s cup; tears filled my eyes, unwont to be thus moistened. The
joyful welcome of my boys, the soft gratulation of Clara, the pressure of
Adrian’s hand, contributed to unman me. I felt that they were near, that
they were safe, yet methought this was all deceit;—the earth reeled, the
firm-enrooted trees moved—dizziness came over me—I sank to the
ground.


My beloved friends were alarmed—nay, they expressed their alarm so
anxiously, that I dared not pronounce the word plague, that hovered on
my lips, lest they should construe my perturbed looks into a symptom, and see
infection in my languor. I had scarcely recovered, and with feigned hilarity
had brought back smiles into my little circle, when we saw Ryland approach.


Ryland had something the appearance of a farmer; of a man whose muscles and
full grown stature had been developed under the influence of vigorous exercise
and exposure to the elements. This was to a great degree the case: for, though
a large landed proprietor, yet, being a projector, and of an ardent and
industrious disposition, he had on his own estate given himself up to
agricultural labours. When he went as ambassador to the Northern States of
America, he, for some time, planned his entire migration; and went so far as to
make several journies far westward on that immense continent, for the purpose
of choosing the site of his new abode. Ambition turned his thoughts from these
designs—ambition, which labouring through various lets and hindrances,
had now led him to the summit of his hopes, in making him Lord Protector of
England.


His countenance was rough but intelligent—his ample brow and quick grey
eyes seemed to look out, over his own plans, and the opposition of his enemies.
His voice was stentorian: his hand stretched out in debate, seemed by its
gigantic and muscular form, to warn his hearers that words were not his only
weapons. Few people had discovered some cowardice and much infirmity of purpose
under this imposing exterior. No man could crush a “butterfly on the
wheel” with better effect; no man better cover a speedy retreat from a
powerful adversary. This had been the secret of his secession at the time of
Lord Raymond’s election. In the unsteady glance of his eye, in his
extreme desire to learn the opinions of all, in the feebleness of his
hand-writing, these qualities might be obscurely traced, but they were not
generally known. He was now our Lord Protector. He had canvassed eagerly for
this post. His protectorate was to be distinguished by every kind of innovation
on the aristocracy. This his selected task was exchanged for the far different
one of encountering the ruin caused by the convulsions of physical nature. He
was incapable of meeting these evils by any comprehensive system; he had
resorted to expedient after expedient, and could never be induced to put a
remedy in force, till it came too late to be of use.


Certainly the Ryland that advanced towards us now, bore small resemblance to
the powerful, ironical, seemingly fearless canvasser for the first rank among
Englishmen. Our native oak, as his partisans called him, was visited truly by a
nipping winter. He scarcely appeared half his usual height; his joints were
unknit, his limbs would not support him; his face was contracted, his eye
wandering; debility of purpose and dastard fear were expressed in every
gesture.


In answer to our eager questions, one word alone fell, as it were
involuntarily, from his convulsed lips: The
Plague.—“Where?”—“Every where—we must
fly—all fly—but whither? No man can tell—there is no refuge
on earth, it comes on us like a thousand packs of wolves—we must all
fly—where shall you go? Where can any of us go?”


These words were syllabled trembling by the iron man. Adrian replied,
“Whither indeed would you fly? We must all remain; and do our best to
help our suffering fellow-creatures.”


“Help!” said Ryland, “there is no help!—great God, who
talks of help! All the world has the plague!”


“Then to avoid it, we must quit the world,” observed Adrian, with a
gentle smile.


Ryland groaned; cold drops stood on his brow. It was useless to oppose his
paroxysm of terror: but we soothed and encouraged him, so that after an
interval he was better able to explain to us the ground of his alarm. It had
come sufficiently home to him. One of his servants, while waiting on him, had
suddenly fallen down dead. The physician declared that he died of the plague.
We endeavoured to calm him—but our own hearts were not calm. I saw the
eye of Idris wander from me to her children, with an anxious appeal to my
judgment. Adrian was absorbed in meditation. For myself, I own that
Ryland’s words rang in my ears; all the world was infected;—in what
uncontaminated seclusion could I save my beloved treasures, until the shadow of
death had passed from over the earth? We sunk into silence: a silence that
drank in the doleful accounts and prognostications of our guest. We had receded
from the crowd; and ascending the steps of the terrace, sought the Castle. Our
change of cheer struck those nearest to us; and, by means of Ryland’s
servants, the report soon spread that he had fled from the plague in London.
The sprightly parties broke up—they assembled in whispering groups. The
spirit of gaiety was eclipsed; the music ceased; the young people left their
occupations and gathered together. The lightness of heart which had dressed
them in masquerade habits, had decorated their tents, and assembled them in
fantastic groups, appeared a sin against, and a provocative to, the awful
destiny that had laid its palsying hand upon hope and life. The merriment of
the hour was an unholy mockery of the sorrows of man. The foreigners whom we
had among us, who had fled from the plague in their own country, now saw their
last asylum invaded; and, fear making them garrulous, they described to eager
listeners the miseries they had beheld in cities visited by the calamity, and
gave fearful accounts of the insidious and irremediable nature of the disease.


We had entered the Castle. Idris stood at a window that over-looked the park;
her maternal eyes sought her own children among the young crowd. An Italian lad
had got an audience about him, and with animated gestures was describing some
scene of horror. Alfred stood immoveable before him, his whole attention
absorbed. Little Evelyn had endeavoured to draw Clara away to play with him;
but the Italian’s tale arrested her, she crept near, her lustrous eyes
fixed on the speaker. Either watching the crowd in the park, or occupied by
painful reflection, we were all silent; Ryland stood by himself in an embrasure
of the window; Adrian paced the hall, revolving some new and overpowering
idea—suddenly he stopped and said: “I have long expected this;
could we in reason expect that this island should be exempt from the universal
visitation? The evil is come home to us, and we must not shrink from our fate.
What are your plans, my Lord Protector, for the benefit of our country?”


“For heaven’s love! Windsor,” cried Ryland, “do not
mock me with that title. Death and disease level all men. I neither pretend to
protect nor govern an hospital—such will England quickly become.”


“Do you then intend, now in time of peril, to recede from your
duties?”


“Duties! speak rationally, my Lord!—when I am a plague-spotted
corpse, where will my duties be? Every man for himself! the devil take the
protectorship, say I, if it expose me to danger!”


“Faint-hearted man!” cried Adrian indignantly—“Your
countrymen put their trust in you, and you betray them!”


“I betray them!” said Ryland, “the plague betrays me.
Faint-hearted! It is well, shut up in your castle, out of danger, to boast
yourself out of fear. Take the Protectorship who will; before God I renounce
it!”


“And before God,” replied his opponent, fervently, “do I
receive it! No one will canvass for this honour now—none envy my danger
or labours. Deposit your powers in my hands. Long have I fought with death, and
much” (he stretched out his thin hand) “much have I suffered in the
struggle. It is not by flying, but by facing the enemy, that we can conquer. If
my last combat is now about to be fought, and I am to be worsted—so let
it be!”


“But come, Ryland, recollect yourself! Men have hitherto thought you
magnanimous and wise, will you cast aside these titles? Consider the panic your
departure will occasion. Return to London. I will go with you. Encourage the
people by your presence. I will incur all the danger. Shame! shame! if the
first magistrate of England be foremost to renounce his duties.”


Meanwhile among our guests in the park, all thoughts of festivity had faded. As
summer-flies are scattered by rain, so did this congregation, late noisy and
happy, in sadness and melancholy murmurs break up, dwindling away apace. With
the set sun and the deepening twilight the park became nearly empty. Adrian and
Ryland were still in earnest discussion. We had prepared a banquet for our
guests in the lower hall of the castle; and thither Idris and I repaired to
receive and entertain the few that remained. There is nothing more melancholy
than a merry-meeting thus turned to sorrow: the gala dresses—the
decorations, gay as they might otherwise be, receive a solemn and funereal
appearance. If such change be painful from lighter causes, it weighed with
intolerable heaviness from the knowledge that the earth’s desolator had
at last, even as an arch-fiend, lightly over-leaped the boundaries our
precautions raised, and at once enthroned himself in the full and beating heart
of our country. Idris sat at the top of the half-empty hall. Pale and tearful,
she almost forgot her duties as hostess; her eyes were fixed on her children.
Alfred’s serious air shewed that he still revolved the tragic story
related by the Italian boy. Evelyn was the only mirthful creature present: he
sat on Clara’s lap; and, making matter of glee from his own fancies,
laughed aloud. The vaulted roof echoed again his infant tone. The poor mother
who had brooded long over, and suppressed the expression of her anguish, now
burst into tears, and folding her babe in her arms, hurried from the hall.
Clara and Alfred followed. While the rest of the company, in confused murmur,
which grew louder and louder, gave voice to their many fears.


The younger part gathered round me to ask my advice; and those who had friends
in London were anxious beyond the rest, to ascertain the present extent of
disease in the metropolis. I encouraged them with such thoughts of cheer as
presented themselves. I told them exceedingly few deaths had yet been
occasioned by pestilence, and gave them hopes, as we were the last visited, so
the calamity might have lost its most venomous power before it had reached us.
The cleanliness, habits of order, and the manner in which our cities were
built, were all in our favour. As it was an epidemic, its chief force was
derived from pernicious qualities in the air, and it would probably do little
harm where this was naturally salubrious. At first, I had spoken only to those
nearest me; but the whole assembly gathered about me, and I found that I was
listened to by all. “My friends,” I said, “our risk is
common; our precautions and exertions shall be common also. If manly courage
and resistance can save us, we will be saved. We will fight the enemy to the
last. Plague shall not find us a ready prey; we will dispute every inch of
ground; and, by methodical and inflexible laws, pile invincible barriers to the
progress of our foe. Perhaps in no part of the world has she met with so
systematic and determined an opposition. Perhaps no country is naturally so
well protected against our invader; nor has nature anywhere been so well
assisted by the hand of man. We will not despair. We are neither cowards nor
fatalists; but, believing that God has placed the means for our preservation in
our own hands, we will use those means to our utmost. Remember that
cleanliness, sobriety, and even good-humour and benevolence, are our best
medicines.”


There was little I could add to this general exhortation; for the plague,
though in London, was not among us. I dismissed the guests therefore; and they
went thoughtful, more than sad, to await the events in store for them.


I now sought Adrian, anxious to hear the result of his discussion with Ryland.
He had in part prevailed; the Lord Protector consented to return to London for
a few weeks; during which time things should be so arranged, as to occasion
less consternation at his departure. Adrian and Idris were together. The
sadness with which the former had first heard that the plague was in London had
vanished; the energy of his purpose informed his body with strength, the solemn
joy of enthusiasm and self-devotion illuminated his countenance; and the
weakness of his physical nature seemed to pass from him, as the cloud of
humanity did, in the ancient fable, from the divine lover of Semele. He was
endeavouring to encourage his sister, and to bring her to look on his intent in
a less tragic light than she was prepared to do; and with passionate eloquence
he unfolded his designs to her.


“Let me, at the first word,” he said, “relieve your mind from
all fear on my account. I will not task myself beyond my powers, nor will I
needlessly seek danger. I feel that I know what ought to be done, and as my
presence is necessary for the accomplishment of my plans, I will take especial
care to preserve my life.


“I am now going to undertake an office fitted for me. I cannot intrigue,
or work a tortuous path through the labyrinth of men’s vices and
passions; but I can bring patience, and sympathy, and such aid as art affords,
to the bed of disease; I can raise from earth the miserable orphan, and awaken
to new hopes the shut heart of the mourner. I can enchain the plague in limits,
and set a term to the misery it would occasion; courage, forbearance, and
watchfulness, are the forces I bring towards this great work.


“O, I shall be something now! From my birth I have aspired like the eagle
—but, unlike the eagle, my wings have failed, and my vision has been
blinded. Disappointment and sickness have hitherto held dominion over me; twin
born with me, my would, was for ever enchained by the shall not,
of these my tyrants. A shepherd-boy that tends a silly flock on the mountains,
was more in the scale of society than I. Congratulate me then that I have found
fitting scope for my powers. I have often thought of offering my services to
the pestilence-stricken towns of France and Italy; but fear of paining you, and
expectation of this catastrophe, withheld me. To England and to Englishmen I
dedicate myself. If I can save one of her mighty spirits from the deadly shaft;
if I can ward disease from one of her smiling cottages, I shall not have lived
in vain.”


Strange ambition this! Yet such was Adrian. He appeared given up to
contemplation, averse to excitement, a lowly student, a man of visions—
but afford him worthy theme, and—


Like to the lark at break of day arising,
From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven’s gate.[7]


so did he spring up from listlessness and unproductive thought, to the highest
pitch of virtuous action.


With him went enthusiasm, the high-wrought resolve, the eye that without
blenching could look at death. With us remained sorrow, anxiety, and
unendurable expectation of evil. The man, says Lord Bacon, who hath wife and
children, has given hostages to fortune. Vain was all philosophical
reasoning—vain all fortitude—vain, vain, a reliance on probable
good. I might heap high the scale with logic, courage, and
resignation—but let one fear for Idris and our children enter the
opposite one, and, over-weighed, it kicked the beam.


The plague was in London! Fools that we were not long ago to have foreseen
this. We wept over the ruin of the boundless continents of the east, and the
desolation of the western world; while we fancied that the little channel
between our island and the rest of the earth was to preserve us alive among the
dead. It were no mighty leap methinks from Calais to Dover. The eye easily
discerns the sister land; they were united once; and the little path that runs
between looks in a map but as a trodden footway through high grass. Yet this
small interval was to save us: the sea was to rise a wall of
adamant—without, disease and misery—within, a shelter from evil, a
nook of the garden of paradise—a particle of celestial soil, which no
evil could invade—truly we were wise in our generation, to imagine all
these things!


But we are awake now. The plague is in London; the air of England is tainted,
and her sons and daughters strew the unwholesome earth. And now, the sea, late
our defence, seems our prison bound; hemmed in by its gulphs, we shall die like
the famished inhabitants of a besieged town. Other nations have a fellowship in
death; but we, shut out from all neighbourhood, must bury our own dead, and
little England become a wide, wide tomb.


This feeling of universal misery assumed concentration and shape, when I looked
on my wife and children; and the thought of danger to them possessed my whole
being with fear. How could I save them? I revolved a thousand and a thousand
plans. They should not die—first I would be gathered to nothingness, ere
infection should come anear these idols of my soul. I would walk barefoot
through the world, to find an uninfected spot; I would build my home on some
wave-tossed plank, drifted about on the barren, shoreless ocean. I would betake
me with them to some wild beast’s den, where a tyger’s cubs, which
I would slay, had been reared in health. I would seek the mountain
eagle’s eirie, and live years suspended in some inaccessible recess of a
sea-bounding cliff—no labour too great, no scheme too wild, if it
promised life to them. O! ye heart-strings of mine, could ye be torn asunder,
and my soul not spend itself in tears of blood for sorrow!


Idris, after the first shock, regained a portion of fortitude. She studiously
shut out all prospect of the future, and cradled her heart in present
blessings. She never for a moment lost sight of her children. But while they in
health sported about her, she could cherish contentment and hope. A strange and
wild restlessness came over me—the more intolerable, because I was forced
to conceal it. My fears for Adrian were ceaseless; August had come; and the
symptoms of plague encreased rapidly in London. It was deserted by all who
possessed the power of removing; and he, the brother of my soul, was exposed to
the perils from which all but slaves enchained by circumstance fled. He
remained to combat the fiend—his side unguarded, his toils
unshared—infection might even reach him, and he die unattended and alone.
By day and night these thoughts pursued me. I resolved to visit London, to see
him; to quiet these agonizing throes by the sweet medicine of hope, or the
opiate of despair.


It was not until I arrived at Brentford, that I perceived much change in the
face of the country. The better sort of houses were shut up; the busy trade of
the town palsied; there was an air of anxiety among the few passengers I met,
and they looked wonderingly at my carriage—the first they had seen pass
towards London, since pestilence sat on its high places, and possessed its busy
streets. I met several funerals; they were slenderly attended by mourners, and
were regarded by the spectators as omens of direst import. Some gazed on these
processions with wild eagerness— others fled timidly—some wept
aloud.


Adrian’s chief endeavour, after the immediate succour of the sick, had
been to disguise the symptoms and progress of the plague from the inhabitants
of London. He knew that fear and melancholy forebodings were powerful
assistants to disease; that desponding and brooding care rendered the physical
nature of man peculiarly susceptible of infection. No unseemly sights were
therefore discernible: the shops were in general open, the concourse of
passengers in some degree kept up. But although the appearance of an infected
town was avoided, to me, who had not beheld it since the commencement of the
visitation, London appeared sufficiently changed. There were no carriages, and
grass had sprung high in the streets; the houses had a desolate look; most of
the shutters were closed; and there was a ghast and frightened stare in the
persons I met, very different from the usual business-like demeanour of the
Londoners. My solitary carriage attracted notice, as it rattled along towards
the Protectoral Palace—and the fashionable streets leading to it wore a
still more dreary and deserted appearance. I found Adrian’s anti-chamber
crowded—it was his hour for giving audience. I was unwilling to disturb
his labours, and waited, watching the ingress and egress of the petitioners.
They consisted of people of the middling and lower classes of society, whose
means of subsistence failed with the cessation of trade, and of the busy spirit
of money-making in all its branches, peculiar to our country. There was an air
of anxiety, sometimes of terror in the new-comers, strongly contrasted with the
resigned and even satisfied mien of those who had had audience. I could read
the influence of my friend in their quickened motions and cheerful faces. Two
o’clock struck, after which none were admitted; those who had been
disappointed went sullenly or sorrowfully away, while I entered the
audience-chamber.


I was struck by the improvement that appeared in the health of Adrian. He was
no longer bent to the ground, like an over-nursed flower of spring, that,
shooting up beyond its strength, is weighed down even by its own coronal of
blossoms. His eyes were bright, his countenance composed, an air of
concentrated energy was diffused over his whole person, much unlike its former
languor. He sat at a table with several secretaries, who were arranging
petitions, or registering the notes made during that day’s audience. Two
or three petitioners were still in attendance. I admired his justice and
patience. Those who possessed a power of living out of London, he advised
immediately to quit it, affording them the means of so doing. Others, whose
trade was beneficial to the city, or who possessed no other refuge, he provided
with advice for better avoiding the epidemic; relieving overloaded families,
supplying the gaps made in others by death. Order, comfort, and even health,
rose under his influence, as from the touch of a magician’s wand.


“I am glad you are come,” he said to me, when we were at last
alone; “I can only spare a few minutes, and must tell you much in that
time. The plague is now in progress—it is useless closing one’s
eyes to the fact—the deaths encrease each week. What will come I cannot
guess. As yet, thank God, I am equal to the government of the town; and I look
only to the present. Ryland, whom I have so long detained, has stipulated that
I shall suffer him to depart before the end of this month. The deputy appointed
by parliament is dead; another therefore must be named; I have advanced my
claim, and I believe that I shall have no competitor. To-night the question is
to be decided, as there is a call of the house for the purpose. You must
nominate me, Lionel; Ryland, for shame, cannot shew himself; but you, my
friend, will do me this service?”


How lovely is devotion! Here was a youth, royally sprung, bred in luxury, by
nature averse to the usual struggles of a public life, and now, in time of
danger, at a period when to live was the utmost scope of the ambitious, he, the
beloved and heroic Adrian, made, in sweet simplicity, an offer to sacrifice
himself for the public good. The very idea was generous and noble,—but,
beyond this, his unpretending manner, his entire want of the assumption of a
virtue, rendered his act ten times more touching. I would have withstood his
request; but I had seen the good he diffused; I felt that his resolves were not
to be shaken, so, with an heavy heart, I consented to do as he asked. He
grasped my hand affectionately:—“Thank you,” he said,
“you have relieved me from a painful dilemma, and are, as you ever were,
the best of my friends. Farewell—I must now leave you for a few hours. Go
you and converse with Ryland. Although he deserts his post in London, he may be
of the greatest service in the north of England, by receiving and assisting
travellers, and contributing to supply the metropolis with food. Awaken him, I
entreat you, to some sense of duty.”


Adrian left me, as I afterwards learnt, upon his daily task of visiting the
hospitals, and inspecting the crowded parts of London. I found Ryland much
altered, even from what he had been when he visited Windsor. Perpetual fear had
jaundiced his complexion, and shrivelled his whole person. I told him of the
business of the evening, and a smile relaxed the contracted muscles. He desired
to go; each day he expected to be infected by pestilence, each day he was
unable to resist the gentle violence of Adrian’s detention. The moment
Adrian should be legally elected his deputy, he would escape to safety. Under
this impression he listened to all I said; and, elevated almost to joy by the
near prospect of his departure, he entered into a discussion concerning the
plans he should adopt in his own county, forgetting, for the moment, his
cherished resolution of shutting himself up from all communication in the
mansion and grounds of his estate.


In the evening, Adrian and I proceeded to Westminster. As we went he reminded
me of what I was to say and do, yet, strange to say, I entered the chamber
without having once reflected on my purpose. Adrian remained in the
coffee-room, while I, in compliance with his desire, took my seat in St.
Stephen’s. There reigned unusual silence in the chamber. I had not
visited it since Raymond’s protectorate; a period conspicuous for a
numerous attendance of members, for the eloquence of the speakers, and the
warmth of the debate. The benches were very empty, those by custom occupied by
the hereditary members were vacant; the city members were there—the
members for the commercial towns, few landed proprietors, and not many of those
who entered parliament for the sake of a career. The first subject that
occupied the attention of the house was an address from the Lord Protector,
praying them to appoint a deputy during a necessary absence on his part.


A silence prevailed, till one of the members coming to me, whispered that the
Earl of Windsor had sent him word that I was to move his election, in the
absence of the person who had been first chosen for this office. Now for the
first time I saw the full extent of my task, and I was overwhelmed by what I
had brought on myself. Ryland had deserted his post through fear of the plague:
from the same fear Adrian had no competitor. And I, the nearest kinsman of the
Earl of Windsor, was to propose his election. I was to thrust this selected and
matchless friend into the post of danger— impossible! the die was
cast—I would offer myself as candidate.


The few members who were present, had come more for the sake of terminating the
business by securing a legal attendance, than under the idea of a debate. I had
risen mechanically—my knees trembled; irresolution hung on my voice, as I
uttered a few words on the necessity of choosing a person adequate to the
dangerous task in hand. But, when the idea of presenting myself in the room of
my friend intruded, the load of doubt and pain was taken from off me. My words
flowed spontaneously—my utterance was firm and quick. I adverted to what
Adrian had already done—I promised the same vigilance in furthering all
his views. I drew a touching picture of his vacillating health; I boasted of my
own strength. I prayed them to save even from himself this scion of the noblest
family in England. My alliance with him was the pledge of my sincerity, my
union with his sister, my children, his presumptive heirs, were the hostages of
my truth.


This unexpected turn in the debate was quickly communicated to Adrian. He
hurried in, and witnessed the termination of my impassioned harangue. I did not
see him: my soul was in my words,—my eyes could not perceive that which
was; while a vision of Adrian’s form, tainted by pestilence, and sinking
in death, floated before them. He seized my hand, as I concluded—
“Unkind!” he cried, “you have betrayed me!” then,
springing forwards, with the air of one who had a right to command, he claimed
the place of deputy as his own. He had bought it, he said, with danger, and
paid for it with toil. His ambition rested there; and, after an interval
devoted to the interests of his country, was I to step in, and reap the profit?
Let them remember what London had been when he arrived: the panic that
prevailed brought famine, while every moral and legal tie was loosened. He had
restored order—this had been a work which required perseverance,
patience, and energy; and he had neither slept nor waked but for the good of
his country.—Would they dare wrong him thus? Would they wrest his
hard-earned reward from him, to bestow it on one, who, never having mingled in
public life, would come a tyro to the craft, in which he was an adept. He
demanded the place of deputy as his right. Ryland had shewn that he preferred
him. Never before had he, who was born even to the inheritance of the throne of
England, never had he asked favour or honour from those now his equals, but who
might have been his subjects. Would they refuse him? Could they thrust back
from the path of distinction and laudable ambition, the heir of their ancient
kings, and heap another disappointment on a fallen house.


No one had ever before heard Adrian allude to the rights of his ancestors. None
had ever before suspected, that power, or the suffrage of the many, could in
any manner become dear to him. He had begun his speech with vehemence; he ended
with unassuming gentleness, making his appeal with the same humility, as if he
had asked to be the first in wealth, honour, and power among Englishmen, and
not, as was the truth, to be the foremost in the ranks of loathsome toils and
inevitable death. A murmur of approbation rose after his speech. “Oh, do
not listen to him,” I cried, “he speaks false—false to
himself,”—I was interrupted: and, silence being restored, we were
ordered, as was the custom, to retire during the decision of the house. I
fancied that they hesitated, and that there was some hope for me—I was
mistaken—hardly had we quitted the chamber, before Adrian was recalled,
and installed in his office of Lord Deputy to the Protector.


We returned together to the palace. “Why, Lionel,” said Adrian,
“what did you intend? you could not hope to conquer, and yet you gave me
the pain of a triumph over my dearest friend.”


“This is mockery,” I replied, “you devote
yourself,—you, the adored brother of Idris, the being, of all the world
contains, dearest to our hearts—you devote yourself to an early death. I
would have prevented this; my death would be a small evil—or rather I
should not die; while you cannot hope to escape.”


“As to the likelihood of escaping,” said Adrian, “ten years
hence the cold stars may shine on the graves of all of us; but as to my
peculiar liability to infection, I could easily prove, both logically and
physically, that in the midst of contagion I have a better chance of life than
you.


“This is my post: I was born for this—to rule England in anarchy,
to save her in danger—to devote myself for her. The blood of my
forefathers cries aloud in my veins, and bids me be first among my countrymen.
Or, if this mode of speech offend you, let me say, that my mother, the proud
queen, instilled early into me a love of distinction, and all that, if the
weakness of my physical nature and my peculiar opinions had not prevented such
a design, might have made me long since struggle for the lost inheritance of my
race. But now my mother, or, if you will, my mother’s lessons, awaken
within me. I cannot lead on to battle; I cannot, through intrigue and
faithlessness rear again the throne upon the wreck of English public spirit.
But I can be the first to support and guard my country, now that terrific
disasters and ruin have laid strong hands upon her.


“That country and my beloved sister are all I have. I will protect the
first—the latter I commit to your charge. If I survive, and she be lost,
I were far better dead. Preserve her—for her own sake I know that you
will—if you require any other spur, think that, in preserving her, you
preserve me. Her faultless nature, one sum of perfections, is wrapt up in her
affections—if they were hurt, she would droop like an unwatered floweret,
and the slightest injury they receive is a nipping frost to her. Already she
fears for us. She fears for the children she adores, and for you, the father of
these, her lover, husband, protector; and you must be near her to support and
encourage her. Return to Windsor then, my brother; for such you are by every
tie—fill the double place my absence imposes on you, and let me, in all
my sufferings here, turn my eyes towards that dear seclusion, and
say—There is peace.”


 [7]
Shakespeare’s Sonnets.

</div></body></text></TEI>