<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="18">
CHAPTER V.

Some disorder had surely crept into the course of the elements, destroying
their benignant influence. The wind, prince of air, raged through his kingdom,
lashing the sea into fury, and subduing the rebel earth into some sort of
obedience.


The God sends down his angry plagues from high,
Famine and pestilence in heaps they die.
Again in vengeance of his wrath he falls
On their great hosts, and breaks their tottering walls;
Arrests their navies on the ocean’s plain,
And whelms their strength with mountains of the main.[6]


Their deadly power shook the flourishing countries of the south, and during
winter, even, we, in our northern retreat, began to quake under their ill
effects.


That fable is unjust, which gives the superiority to the sun over the wind. Who
has not seen the lightsome earth, the balmy atmosphere, and basking nature
become dark, cold and ungenial, when the sleeping wind has awoke in the east?
Or, when the dun clouds thickly veil the sky, while exhaustless stores of rain
are poured down, until, the dank earth refusing to imbibe the superabundant
moisture, it lies in pools on the surface; when the torch of day seems like a
meteor, to be quenched; who has not seen the cloud-stirring north arise, the
streaked blue appear, and soon an opening made in the vapours in the eye of the
wind, through which the bright azure shines? The clouds become thin; an arch is
formed for ever rising upwards, till, the universal cope being unveiled, the
sun pours forth its rays, re-animated and fed by the breeze.


Then mighty art thou, O wind, to be throned above all other vicegerents of
nature’s power; whether thou comest destroying from the east, or pregnant
with elementary life from the west; thee the clouds obey; the sun is
subservient to thee; the shoreless ocean is thy slave! Thou sweepest over the
earth, and oaks, the growth of centuries, submit to thy viewless axe; the
snow-drift is scattered on the pinnacles of the Alps, the avalanche thunders
down their vallies. Thou holdest the keys of the frost, and canst first chain
and then set free the streams; under thy gentle governance the buds and leaves
are born, they flourish nursed by thee.


Why dost thou howl thus, O wind? By day and by night for four long months thy
roarings have not ceased—the shores of the sea are strewn with wrecks,
its keel-welcoming surface has become impassable, the earth has shed her beauty
in obedience to thy command; the frail balloon dares no longer sail on the
agitated air; thy ministers, the clouds, deluge the land with rain; rivers
forsake their banks; the wild torrent tears up the mountain path; plain and
wood, and verdant dell are despoiled of their loveliness; our very cities are
wasted by thee. Alas, what will become of us? It seems as if the giant waves of
ocean, and vast arms of the sea, were about to wrench the deep-rooted island
from its centre; and cast it, a ruin and a wreck, upon the fields of the
Atlantic.


What are we, the inhabitants of this globe, least among the many that people
infinite space? Our minds embrace infinity; the visible mechanism of our being
is subject to merest accident. Day by day we are forced to believe this. He
whom a scratch has disorganized, he who disappears from apparent life under the
influence of the hostile agency at work around us, had the same powers as
I—I also am subject to the same laws. In the face of all this we call
ourselves lords of the creation, wielders of the elements, masters of life and
death, and we allege in excuse of this arrogance, that though the individual is
destroyed, man continues for ever.


Thus, losing our identity, that of which we are chiefly conscious, we glory in
the continuity of our species, and learn to regard death without terror. But
when any whole nation becomes the victim of the destructive powers of exterior
agents, then indeed man shrinks into insignificance, he feels his tenure of
life insecure, his inheritance on earth cut off.


I remember, after having witnessed the destructive effects of a fire, I could
not even behold a small one in a stove, without a sensation of fear. The
mounting flames had curled round the building, as it fell, and was destroyed.
They insinuated themselves into the substances about them, and the impediments
to their progress yielded at their touch. Could we take integral parts of this
power, and not be subject to its operation? Could we domesticate a cub of this
wild beast, and not fear its growth and maturity?


Thus we began to feel, with regard to many-visaged death let loose on the
chosen districts of our fair habitation, and above all, with regard to the
plague. We feared the coming summer. Nations, bordering on the already infected
countries, began to enter upon serious plans for the better keeping out of the
enemy. We, a commercial people, were obliged to bring such schemes under
consideration; and the question of contagion became matter of earnest
disquisition.


That the plague was not what is commonly called contagious, like the scarlet
fever, or extinct small-pox, was proved. It was called an epidemic. But the
grand question was still unsettled of how this epidemic was generated and
increased. If infection depended upon the air, the air was subject to
infection. As for instance, a typhus fever has been brought by ships to one
sea-port town; yet the very people who brought it there, were incapable of
communicating it in a town more fortunately situated. But how are we to judge
of airs, and pronounce—in such a city plague will die unproductive; in
such another, nature has provided for it a plentiful harvest? In the same way,
individuals may escape ninety-nine times, and receive the death-blow at the
hundredth; because bodies are sometimes in a state to reject the infection of
malady, and at others, thirsty to imbibe it. These reflections made our
legislators pause, before they could decide on the laws to be put in force. The
evil was so wide-spreading, so violent and immedicable, that no care, no
prevention could be judged superfluous, which even added a chance to our
escape.


These were questions of prudence; there was no immediate necessity for an
earnest caution. England was still secure. France, Germany, Italy and Spain,
were interposed, walls yet without a breach, between us and the plague. Our
vessels truly were the sport of winds and waves, even as Gulliver was the toy
of the Brobdignagians; but we on our stable abode could not be hurt in life or
limb by these eruptions of nature. We could not fear—we did not. Yet a
feeling of awe, a breathless sentiment of wonder, a painful sense of the
degradation of humanity, was introduced into every heart. Nature, our mother,
and our friend, had turned on us a brow of menace. She shewed us plainly, that,
though she permitted us to assign her laws and subdue her apparent powers, yet,
if she put forth but a finger, we must quake. She could take our globe, fringed
with mountains, girded by the atmosphere, containing the condition of our
being, and all that man’s mind could invent or his force achieve; she
could take the ball in her hand, and cast it into space, where life would be
drunk up, and man and all his efforts for ever annihilated.


These speculations were rife among us; yet not the less we proceeded in our
daily occupations, and our plans, whose accomplishment demanded the lapse of
many years. No voice was heard telling us to hold! When foreign distresses came
to be felt by us through the channels of commerce, we set ourselves to apply
remedies. Subscriptions were made for the emigrants, and merchants bankrupt by
the failure of trade. The English spirit awoke to its full activity, and, as it
had ever done, set itself to resist the evil, and to stand in the breach which
diseased nature had suffered chaos and death to make in the bounds and banks
which had hitherto kept them out.


At the commencement of summer, we began to feel, that the mischief which had
taken place in distant countries was greater than we had at first suspected.
Quito was destroyed by an earthquake. Mexico laid waste by the united effects
of storm, pestilence and famine. Crowds of emigrants inundated the west of
Europe; and our island had become the refuge of thousands. In the mean time
Ryland had been chosen Protector. He had sought this office with eagerness,
under the idea of turning his whole forces to the suppression of the privileged
orders of our community. His measures were thwarted, and his schemes
interrupted by this new state of things. Many of the foreigners were utterly
destitute; and their increasing numbers at length forbade a recourse to the
usual modes of relief. Trade was stopped by the failure of the interchange of
cargoes usual between us, and America, India, Egypt and Greece. A sudden break
was made in the routine of our lives. In vain our Protector and his partizans
sought to conceal this truth; in vain, day after day, he appointed a period for
the discussion of the new laws concerning hereditary rank and privilege; in
vain he endeavoured to represent the evil as partial and temporary. These
disasters came home to so many bosoms, and, through the various channels of
commerce, were carried so entirely into every class and division of the
community, that of necessity they became the first question in the state, the
chief subjects to which we must turn our attention.


Can it be true, each asked the other with wonder and dismay, that whole
countries are laid waste, whole nations annihilated, by these disorders in
nature? The vast cities of America, the fertile plains of Hindostan, the
crowded abodes of the Chinese, are menaced with utter ruin. Where late the busy
multitudes assembled for pleasure or profit, now only the sound of wailing and
misery is heard. The air is empoisoned, and each human being inhales death,
even while in youth and health, their hopes are in the flower. We called to
mind the plague of 1348, when it was calculated that a third of mankind had
been destroyed. As yet western Europe was uninfected; would it always be so?


O, yes, it would—Countrymen, fear not! In the still uncultivated wilds of
America, what wonder that among its other giant destroyers, plague should be
numbered! It is of old a native of the East, sister of the tornado, the
earthquake, and the simoon. Child of the sun, and nursling of the tropics, it
would expire in these climes. It drinks the dark blood of the inhabitant of the
south, but it never feasts on the pale-faced Celt. If perchance some stricken
Asiatic come among us, plague dies with him, uncommunicated and innoxious. Let
us weep for our brethren, though we can never experience their reverse. Let us
lament over and assist the children of the garden of the earth. Late we envied
their abodes, their spicy groves, fertile plains, and abundant loveliness. But
in this mortal life extremes are always matched; the thorn grows with the rose,
the poison tree and the cinnamon mingle their boughs. Persia, with its cloth of
gold, marble halls, and infinite wealth, is now a tomb. The tent of the Arab is
fallen in the sands, and his horse spurns the ground unbridled and unsaddled.
The voice of lamentation fills the valley of Cashmere; its dells and woods, its
cool fountains, and gardens of roses, are polluted by the dead; in Circassia
and Georgia the spirit of beauty weeps over the ruin of its favourite
temple—the form of woman.


Our own distresses, though they were occasioned by the fictitious reciprocity
of commerce, encreased in due proportion. Bankers, merchants, and
manufacturers, whose trade depended on exports and interchange of wealth,
became bankrupt. Such things, when they happen singly, affect only the
immediate parties; but the prosperity of the nation was now shaken by frequent
and extensive losses. Families, bred in opulence and luxury, were reduced to
beggary. The very state of peace in which we gloried was injurious; there were
no means of employing the idle, or of sending any overplus of population out of
the country. Even the source of colonies was dried up, for in New Holland, Van
Diemen’s Land, and the Cape of Good Hope, plague raged. O, for some
medicinal vial to purge unwholesome nature, and bring back the earth to its
accustomed health!


Ryland was a man of strong intellects and quick and sound decision in the usual
course of things, but he stood aghast at the multitude of evils that gathered
round us. Must he tax the landed interest to assist our commercial population?
To do this, he must gain the favour of the chief land-holders, the nobility of
the country; and these were his vowed enemies—he must conciliate them by
abandoning his favourite scheme of equalization; he must confirm them in their
manorial rights; he must sell his cherished plans for the permanent good of his
country, for temporary relief. He must aim no more at the dear object of his
ambition; throwing his arms aside, he must for present ends give up the
ultimate object of his endeavours. He came to Windsor to consult with us. Every
day added to his difficulties; the arrival of fresh vessels with emigrants, the
total cessation of commerce, the starving multitude that thronged around the
palace of the Protectorate, were circumstances not to be tampered with. The
blow was struck; the aristocracy obtained all they wished, and they subscribed
to a twelvemonths’ bill, which levied twenty per cent on all the
rent-rolls of the country. Calm was now restored to the metropolis, and to the
populous cities, before driven to desperation; and we returned to the
consideration of distant calamities, wondering if the future would bring any
alleviation to their excess. It was August; so there could be small hope of
relief during the heats. On the contrary, the disease gained virulence, while
starvation did its accustomed work. Thousands died unlamented; for beside the
yet warm corpse the mourner was stretched, made mute by death.


On the eighteenth of this month news arrived in London that the plague was in
France and Italy. These tidings were at first whispered about town; but no one
dared express aloud the soul-quailing intelligence. When any one met a friend
in the street, he only cried as he hurried on, “You know!”—
while the other, with an ejaculation of fear and horror, would answer,—
“What will become of us?” At length it was mentioned in the
newspapers. The paragraph was inserted in an obscure part: “We regret to
state that there can be no longer a doubt of the plague having been introduced
at Leghorn, Genoa, and Marseilles.” No word of comment followed; each
reader made his own fearful one. We were as a man who hears that his house is
burning, and yet hurries through the streets, borne along by a lurking hope of
a mistake, till he turns the corner, and sees his sheltering roof enveloped in
a flame. Before it had been a rumour; but now in words uneraseable, in definite
and undeniable print, the knowledge went forth. Its obscurity of situation
rendered it the more conspicuous: the diminutive letters grew gigantic to the
bewildered eye of fear: they seemed graven with a pen of iron, impressed by
fire, woven in the clouds, stamped on the very front of the universe.


The English, whether travellers or residents, came pouring in one great
revulsive stream, back on their own country; and with them crowds of Italians
and Spaniards. Our little island was filled even to bursting. At first an
unusual quantity of specie made its appearance with the emigrants; but these
people had no means of receiving back into their hands what they spent among
us. With the advance of summer, and the increase of the distemper, rents were
unpaid, and their remittances failed them. It was impossible to see these
crowds of wretched, perishing creatures, late nurslings of luxury, and not
stretch out a hand to save them. As at the conclusion of the eighteenth
century, the English unlocked their hospitable store, for the relief of those
driven from their homes by political revolution; so now they were not backward
in affording aid to the victims of a more wide-spreading calamity. We had many
foreign friends whom we eagerly sought out, and relieved from dreadful penury.
Our Castle became an asylum for the unhappy. A little population occupied its
halls. The revenue of its possessor, which had always found a mode of
expenditure congenial to his generous nature, was now attended to more
parsimoniously, that it might embrace a wider portion of utility. It was not
however money, except partially, but the necessaries of life, that became
scarce. It was difficult to find an immediate remedy. The usual one of imports
was entirely cut off. In this emergency, to feed the very people to whom we had
given refuge, we were obliged to yield to the plough and the mattock our
pleasure-grounds and parks. Live stock diminished sensibly in the country, from
the effects of the great demand in the market. Even the poor deer, our antlered
proteges, were obliged to fall for the sake of worthier pensioners. The labour
necessary to bring the lands to this sort of culture, employed and fed the
offcasts of the diminished manufactories.


Adrian did not rest only with the exertions he could make with regard to his
own possessions. He addressed himself to the wealthy of the land; he made
proposals in parliament little adapted to please the rich; but his earnest
pleadings and benevolent eloquence were irresistible. To give up their
pleasure-grounds to the agriculturist, to diminish sensibly the number of
horses kept for the purposes of luxury throughout the country, were means
obvious, but unpleasing. Yet, to the honour of the English be it recorded,
that, although natural disinclination made them delay awhile, yet when the
misery of their fellow-creatures became glaring, an enthusiastic generosity
inspired their decrees. The most luxurious were often the first to part with
their indulgencies. As is common in communities, a fashion was set. The
high-born ladies of the country would have deemed themselves disgraced if they
had now enjoyed, what they before called a necessary, the ease of a carriage.
Chairs, as in olden time, and Indian palanquins were introduced for the infirm;
but else it was nothing singular to see females of rank going on foot to places
of fashionable resort. It was more common, for all who possessed landed
property to secede to their estates, attended by whole troops of the indigent,
to cut down their woods to erect temporary dwellings, and to portion out their
parks, parterres and flower-gardens, to necessitous families. Many of these, of
high rank in their own countries, now, with hoe in hand, turned up the soil. It
was found necessary at last to check the spirit of sacrifice, and to remind
those whose generosity proceeded to lavish waste, that, until the present state
of things became permanent, of which there was no likelihood, it was wrong to
carry change so far as to make a reaction difficult. Experience demonstrated
that in a year or two pestilence would cease; it were well that in the mean
time we should not have destroyed our fine breeds of horses, or have utterly
changed the face of the ornamented portion of the country.


It may be imagined that things were in a bad state indeed, before this spirit
of benevolence could have struck such deep roots. The infection had now spread
in the southern provinces of France. But that country had so many resources in
the way of agriculture, that the rush of population from one part of it to
another, and its increase through foreign emigration, was less felt than with
us. The panic struck appeared of more injury, than disease and its natural
concomitants.


Winter was hailed, a general and never-failing physician. The embrowning woods,
and swollen rivers, the evening mists, and morning frosts, were welcomed with
gratitude. The effects of purifying cold were immediately felt; and the lists
of mortality abroad were curtailed each week. Many of our visitors left us:
those whose homes were far in the south, fled delightedly from our northern
winter, and sought their native land, secure of plenty even after their fearful
visitation. We breathed again. What the coming summer would bring, we knew not;
but the present months were our own, and our hopes of a cessation of pestilence
were high.


 [6]Elton’s translation of Hesiod’s Works.

</div></body></text></TEI>