<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">
CHAPTER IX.

Thus sad and disarranged were the thoughts of my poor sister, when she became
assured of the infidelity of Raymond. All her virtues and all her defects
tended to make the blow incurable. Her affection for me, her brother, for
Adrian and Idris, was subject as it were to the reigning passion of her heart;
even her maternal tenderness borrowed half its force from the delight she had
in tracing Raymond’s features and expression in the infant’s
countenance. She had been reserved and even stern in childhood; but love had
softened the asperities of her character, and her union with Raymond had caused
her talents and affections to unfold themselves; the one betrayed, and the
other lost, she in some degree returned to her ancient disposition. The
concentrated pride of her nature, forgotten during her blissful dream, awoke,
and with its adder’s sting pierced her heart; her humility of spirit
augmented the power of the venom; she had been exalted in her own estimation,
while distinguished by his love: of what worth was she, now that he thrust her
from this preferment? She had been proud of having won and preserved
him—but another had won him from her, and her exultation was as cold as a
water quenched ember.


We, in our retirement, remained long in ignorance of her misfortune. Soon after
the festival she had sent for her child, and then she seemed to have forgotten
us. Adrian observed a change during a visit that he afterward paid them; but he
could not tell its extent, or divine the cause. They still appeared in public
together, and lived under the same roof. Raymond was as usual courteous, though
there was, on occasions, an unbidden haughtiness, or painful abruptness in his
manners, which startled his gentle friend; his brow was not clouded but disdain
sat on his lips, and his voice was harsh. Perdita was all kindness and
attention to her lord; but she was silent, and beyond words sad. She had grown
thin and pale; and her eyes often filled with tears. Sometimes she looked at
Raymond, as if to say—That it should be so! At others her countenance
expressed—I will still do all I can to make you happy. But Adrian read
with uncertain aim the charactery of her face, and might mistake.—Clara
was always with her, and she seemed most at ease, when, in an obscure corner,
she could sit holding her child’s hand, silent and lonely. Still Adrian
was unable to guess the truth; he entreated them to visit us at Windsor, and
they promised to come during the following month.


It was May before they arrived: the season had decked the forest trees with
leaves, and its paths with a thousand flowers. We had notice of their intention
the day before; and, early in the morning, Perdita arrived with her daughter.
Raymond would follow soon, she said; he had been detained by business.
According to Adrian’s account, I had expected to find her sad; but, on
the contrary, she appeared in the highest spirits: true, she had grown thin,
her eyes were somewhat hollow, and her cheeks sunk, though tinged by a bright
glow. She was delighted to see us; caressed our children, praised their growth
and improvement; Clara also was pleased to meet again her young friend Alfred;
all kinds of childish games were entered into, in which Perdita joined. She
communicated her gaiety to us, and as we amused ourselves on the Castle
Terrace, it appeared that a happier, less care-worn party could not have been
assembled. “This is better, Mamma,” said Clara, “than being
in that dismal London, where you often cry, and never laugh as you do
now.”—“Silence, little foolish thing,” replied her
mother, “and remember any one that mentions London is sent to Coventry
for an hour.”


Soon after, Raymond arrived. He did not join as usual in the playful spirit of
the rest; but, entering into conversation with Adrian and myself, by degrees we
seceded from our companions, and Idris and Perdita only remained with the
children. Raymond talked of his new buildings; of his plan for an establishment
for the better education of the poor; as usual Adrian and he entered into
argument, and the time slipped away unperceived.


We assembled again towards evening, and Perdita insisted on our having recourse
to music. She wanted, she said, to give us a specimen of her new
accomplishment; for since she had been in London, she had applied herself to
music, and sang, without much power, but with a great deal of sweetness. We
were not permitted by her to select any but light-hearted melodies; and all the
Operas of Mozart were called into service, that we might choose the most
exhilarating of his airs. Among the other transcendant attributes of
Mozart’s music, it possesses more than any other that of appearing to
come from the heart; you enter into the passions expressed by him, and are
transported with grief, joy, anger, or confusion, as he, our soul’s
master, chooses to inspire. For some time, the spirit of hilarity was kept up;
but, at length, Perdita receded from the piano, for Raymond had joined in the
trio of “Taci ingiusto core,” in Don Giovanni, whose arch
entreaty was softened by him into tenderness, and thrilled her heart with
memories of the changed past; it was the same voice, the same tone, the
self-same sounds and words, which often before she had received, as the homage
of love to her—no longer was it that; and this concord of sound with its
dissonance of expression penetrated her with regret and despair. Soon after
Idris, who was at the harp, turned to that passionate and sorrowful air in
Figaro, “Porgi, amor, qualche ristoro,” in which the
deserted Countess laments the change of the faithless Almaviva. The soul of
tender sorrow is breathed forth in this strain; and the sweet voice of Idris,
sustained by the mournful chords of her instrument, added to the expression of
the words. During the pathetic appeal with which it concludes, a stifled sob
attracted our attention to Perdita, the cessation of the music recalled her to
herself, she hastened out of the hall—I followed her. At first, she
seemed to wish to shun me; and then, yielding to my earnest questioning, she
threw herself on my neck, and wept aloud:—“Once more,” she
cried, “once more on your friendly breast, my beloved brother, can the
lost Perdita pour forth her sorrows. I had imposed a law of silence on myself;
and for months I have kept it. I do wrong in weeping now, and greater wrong in
giving words to my grief. I will not speak! Be it enough for you to know that I
am miserable—be it enough for you to know, that the painted veil of life
is rent, that I sit for ever shrouded in darkness and gloom, that grief is my
sister, everlasting lamentation my mate!”


I endeavoured to console her; I did not question her! but I caressed her,
assured her of my deepest affection and my intense interest in the changes of
her fortune:—“Dear words,” she cried, “expressions of
love come upon my ear, like the remembered sounds of forgotten music, that had
been dear to me. They are vain, I know; how very vain in their attempt to
soothe or comfort me. Dearest Lionel, you cannot guess what I have suffered
during these long months. I have read of mourners in ancient days, who clothed
themselves in sackcloth, scattered dust upon their heads, ate their bread
mingled with ashes, and took up their abode on the bleak mountain tops,
reproaching heaven and earth aloud with their misfortunes. Why this is the very
luxury of sorrow! thus one might go on from day to day contriving new
extravagances, revelling in the paraphernalia of woe, wedded to all the
appurtenances of despair. Alas! I must for ever conceal the wretchedness that
consumes me. I must weave a veil of dazzling falsehood to hide my grief from
vulgar eyes, smoothe my brow, and paint my lips in deceitful smiles—even
in solitude I dare not think how lost I am, lest I become insane and
rave.”


The tears and agitation of my poor sister had rendered her unfit to return to
the circle we had left—so I persuaded her to let me drive her through the
park; and, during the ride, I induced her to confide the tale of her
unhappiness to me, fancying that talking of it would lighten the burthen, and
certain that, if there were a remedy, it should be found and secured to her.


Several weeks had elapsed since the festival of the anniversary, and she had
been unable to calm her mind, or to subdue her thoughts to any regular train.
Sometimes she reproached herself for taking too bitterly to heart, that which
many would esteem an imaginary evil; but this was no subject for reason; and,
ignorant as she was of the motives and true conduct of Raymond, things assumed
for her even a worse appearance, than the reality warranted. He was seldom at
the palace; never, but when he was assured that his public duties would prevent
his remaining alone with Perdita. They seldom addressed each other, shunning
explanation, each fearing any communication the other might make. Suddenly,
however, the manners of Raymond changed; he appeared to desire to find
opportunities of bringing about a return to kindness and intimacy with my
sister. The tide of love towards her appeared to flow again; he could never
forget, how once he had been devoted to her, making her the shrine and
storehouse wherein to place every thought and every sentiment. Shame seemed to
hold him back; yet he evidently wished to establish a renewal of confidence and
affection. From the moment Perdita had sufficiently recovered herself to form
any plan of action, she had laid one down, which now she prepared to follow.
She received these tokens of returning love with gentleness; she did not shun
his company; but she endeavoured to place a barrier in the way of familiar
intercourse or painful discussion, which mingled pride and shame prevented
Raymond from surmounting. He began at last to shew signs of angry impatience,
and Perdita became aware that the system she had adopted could not continue;
she must explain herself to him; she could not summon courage to
speak—she wrote thus:—


“Read this letter with patience, I entreat you. It will contain no
reproaches. Reproach is indeed an idle word: for what should I reproach you?


“Allow me in some degree to explain my feeling; without that, we shall
both grope in the dark, mistaking one another; erring from the path which may
conduct, one of us at least, to a more eligible mode of life than that led by
either during the last few weeks.


“I loved you—I love you—neither anger nor pride dictates
these lines; but a feeling beyond, deeper, and more unalterable than either. My
affections are wounded; it is impossible to heal them:—cease then the
vain endeavour, if indeed that way your endeavours tend. Forgiveness! Return!
Idle words are these! I forgive the pain I endure; but the trodden path cannot
be retraced.


“Common affection might have been satisfied with common usages. I
believed that you read my heart, and knew its devotion, its unalienable
fidelity towards you. I never loved any but you. You came the embodied image of
my fondest dreams. The praise of men, power and high aspirations attended your
career. Love for you invested the world for me in enchanted light; it was no
longer the earth I trod—the earth, common mother, yielding only trite and
stale repetition of objects and circumstances old and worn out. I lived in a
temple glorified by intensest sense of devotion and rapture; I walked, a
consecrated being, contemplating only your power, your excellence;


For O, you stood beside me, like my youth,
Transformed for me the real to a dream,
Cloathing the palpable and familiar
With golden exhalations of the dawn.


‘The bloom has vanished from my life’—there is no morning to
this all investing night; no rising to the set-sun of love. In those days the
rest of the world was nothing to me: all other men—I never considered nor
felt what they were; nor did I look on you as one of them. Separated from them;
exalted in my heart; sole possessor of my affections; single object of my
hopes, the best half of myself.


“Ah, Raymond, were we not happy? Did the sun shine on any, who could
enjoy its light with purer and more intense bliss? It was not—it is not a
common infidelity at which I repine. It is the disunion of an whole which may
not have parts; it is the carelessness with which you have shaken off the
mantle of election with which to me you were invested, and have become one
among the many. Dream not to alter this. Is not love a divinity, because it is
immortal? Did not I appear sanctified, even to myself, because this love had
for its temple my heart? I have gazed on you as you slept, melted even to
tears, as the idea filled my mind, that all I possessed lay cradled in those
idolized, but mortal lineaments before me. Yet, even then, I have checked
thick-coming fears with one thought; I would not fear death, for the emotions
that linked us must be immortal.


“And now I do not fear death. I should be well pleased to close my eyes,
never more to open them again. And yet I fear it; even as I fear all things;
for in any state of being linked by the chain of memory with this, happiness
would not return—even in Paradise, I must feel that your love was less
enduring than the mortal beatings of my fragile heart, every pulse of which
knells audibly,


    The funeral note
Of love, deep buried, without resurrection.


No—no—me miserable; for love extinct there is no resurrection!


“Yet I love you. Yet, and for ever, would I contribute all I possess to
your welfare. On account of a tattling world; for the sake of my—of our
child, I would remain by you, Raymond, share your fortunes, partake your
counsel. Shall it be thus? We are no longer lovers; nor can I call myself a
friend to any; since, lost as I am, I have no thought to spare from my own
wretched, engrossing self. But it will please me to see you each day! to listen
to the public voice praising you; to keep up your paternal love for our girl;
to hear your voice; to know that I am near you, though you are no longer mine.


“If you wish to break the chains that bind us, say the word, and it shall
be done—I will take all the blame on myself, of harshness or unkindness,
in the world’s eye.


“Yet, as I have said, I should be best pleased, at least for the present,
to live under the same roof with you. When the fever of my young life is spent;
when placid age shall tame the vulture that devours me, friendship may come,
love and hope being dead. May this be true? Can my soul, inextricably linked to
this perishable frame, become lethargic and cold, even as this sensitive
mechanism shall lose its youthful elasticity? Then, with lack-lustre eyes, grey
hairs, and wrinkled brow, though now the words sound hollow and meaningless,
then, tottering on the grave’s extreme edge, I may be—your
affectionate and true friend,


“PERDITA.”


Raymond’s answer was brief. What indeed could he reply to her complaints,
to her griefs which she jealously paled round, keeping out all thought of
remedy. “Notwithstanding your bitter letter,” he wrote, “for
bitter I must call it, you are the chief person in my estimation, and it is
your happiness that I would principally consult. Do that which seems best to
you: and if you can receive gratification from one mode of life in preference
to another, do not let me be any obstacle. I foresee that the plan which you
mark out in your letter will not endure long; but you are mistress of yourself,
and it is my sincere wish to contribute as far as you will permit me to your
happiness.”


“Raymond has prophesied well,” said Perdita, “alas, that it
should be so! our present mode of life cannot continue long, yet I will not be
the first to propose alteration. He beholds in me one whom he has injured even
unto death; and I derive no hope from his kindness; no change can possibly be
brought about even by his best intentions. As well might Cleopatra have worn as
an ornament the vinegar which contained her dissolved pearl, as I be content
with the love that Raymond can now offer me.”


I own that I did not see her misfortune with the same eyes as Perdita. At all
events methought that the wound could be healed; and, if they remained
together, it would be so. I endeavoured therefore to sooth and soften her mind;
and it was not until after many endeavours that I gave up the task as
impracticable. Perdita listened to me impatiently, and answered with some
asperity:—“Do you think that any of your arguments are new to me?
or that my own burning wishes and intense anguish have not suggested them all a
thousand times, with far more eagerness and subtlety than you can put into
them? Lionel, you cannot understand what woman’s love is. In days of
happiness I have often repeated to myself, with a grateful heart and exulting
spirit, all that Raymond sacrificed for me. I was a poor, uneducated,
unbefriended, mountain girl, raised from nothingness by him. All that I
possessed of the luxuries of life came from him. He gave me an illustrious name
and noble station; the world’s respect reflected from his own glory: all
this joined to his own undying love, inspired me with sensations towards him,
akin to those with which we regard the Giver of life. I gave him love only. I
devoted myself to him: imperfect creature that I was, I took myself to task,
that I might become worthy of him. I watched over my hasty temper, subdued my
burning impatience of character, schooled my self-engrossing thoughts,
educating myself to the best perfection I might attain, that the fruit of my
exertions might be his happiness. I took no merit to myself for this. He
deserved it all—all labour, all devotion, all sacrifice; I would have
toiled up a scaleless Alp, to pluck a flower that would please him. I was ready
to quit you all, my beloved and gifted companions, and to live only with him,
for him. I could not do otherwise, even if I had wished; for if we are said to
have two souls, he was my better soul, to which the other was a perpetual
slave. One only return did he owe me, even fidelity. I earned that; I deserved
it. Because I was mountain bred, unallied to the noble and wealthy, shall he
think to repay me by an empty name and station? Let him take them back; without
his love they are nothing to me. Their only merit in my eyes was that they were
his.”


Thus passionately Perdita ran on. When I adverted to the question of their
entire separation, she replied: “Be it so! One day the period will
arrive; I know it, and feel it. But in this I am a coward. This imperfect
companionship, and our masquerade of union, are strangely dear to me. It is
painful, I allow, destructive, impracticable. It keeps up a perpetual fever in
my veins; it frets my immedicable wound; it is instinct with poison. Yet I must
cling to it; perhaps it will kill me soon, and thus perform a thankful
office.”


In the mean time, Raymond had remained with Adrian and Idris. He was naturally
frank; the continued absence of Perdita and myself became remarkable; and
Raymond soon found relief from the constraint of months, by an unreserved
confidence with his two friends. He related to them the situation in which he
had found Evadne. At first, from delicacy to Adrian he concealed her name; but
it was divulged in the course of his narrative, and her former lover heard with
the most acute agitation the history of her sufferings. Idris had shared
Perdita’s ill opinion of the Greek; but Raymond’s account softened
and interested her. Evadne’s constancy, fortitude, even her ill-fated and
ill-regulated love, were matter of admiration and pity; especially when, from
the detail of the events of the nineteenth of October, it was apparent that she
preferred suffering and death to any in her eyes degrading application for the
pity and assistance of her lover. Her subsequent conduct did not diminish this
interest. At first, relieved from famine and the grave, watched over by Raymond
with the tenderest assiduity, with that feeling of repose peculiar to
convalescence, Evadne gave herself up to rapturous gratitude and love. But
reflection returned with health. She questioned him with regard to the motives
which had occasioned his critical absence. She framed her enquiries with Greek
subtlety; she formed her conclusions with the decision and firmness peculiar to
her disposition. She could not divine, that the breach which she had occasioned
between Raymond and Perdita was already irreparable: but she knew, that under
the present system it would be widened each day, and that its result must be to
destroy her lover’s happiness, and to implant the fangs of remorse in his
heart. From the moment that she perceived the right line of conduct, she
resolved to adopt it, and to part from Raymond for ever. Conflicting passions,
long-cherished love, and self-inflicted disappointment, made her regard death
alone as sufficient refuge for her woe. But the same feelings and opinions
which had before restrained her, acted with redoubled force; for she knew that
the reflection that he had occasioned her death, would pursue Raymond through
life, poisoning every enjoyment, clouding every prospect. Besides, though the
violence of her anguish made life hateful, it had not yet produced that
monotonous, lethargic sense of changeless misery which for the most part
produces suicide. Her energy of character induced her still to combat with the
ills of life; even those attendant on hopeless love presented themselves,
rather in the shape of an adversary to be overcome, than of a victor to whom
she must submit. Besides, she had memories of past tenderness to cherish,
smiles, words, and even tears, to con over, which, though remembered in
desertion and sorrow, were to be preferred to the forgetfulness of the grave.
It was impossible to guess at the whole of her plan. Her letter to Raymond gave
no clue for discovery; it assured him, that she was in no danger of wanting the
means of life; she promised in it to preserve herself, and some future day
perhaps to present herself to him in a station not unworthy of her. She then
bade him, with the eloquence of despair and of unalterable love, a last
farewell.


All these circumstances were now related to Adrian and Idris. Raymond then
lamented the cureless evil of his situation with Perdita. He declared,
notwithstanding her harshness, he even called it coldness, that he loved her.
He had been ready once with the humility of a penitent, and the duty of a
vassal, to surrender himself to her; giving up his very soul to her tutelage,
to become her pupil, her slave, her bondsman. She had rejected these advances;
and the time for such exuberant submission, which must be founded on love and
nourished by it, was now passed. Still all his wishes and endeavours were
directed towards her peace, and his chief discomfort arose from the perception
that he exerted himself in vain. If she were to continue inflexible in the line
of conduct she now pursued, they must part. The combinations and occurrences of
this senseless mode of intercourse were maddening to him. Yet he would not
propose the separation. He was haunted by the fear of causing the death of one
or other of the beings implicated in these events; and he could not persuade
himself to undertake to direct the course of events, lest, ignorant of the land
he traversed, he should lead those attached to the car into irremediable ruin.


After a discussion on this subject, which lasted for several hours, he took
leave of his friends, and returned to town, unwilling to meet Perdita before
us, conscious, as we all must be, of the thoughts uppermost in the minds of
both. Perdita prepared to follow him with her child. Idris endeavoured to
persuade her to remain. My poor sister looked at the counsellor with affright.
She knew that Raymond had conversed with her; had he instigated this
request?—was this to be the prelude to their eternal separation?—I
have said, that the defects of her character awoke and acquired vigour from her
unnatural position. She regarded with suspicion the invitation of Idris; she
embraced me, as if she were about to be deprived of my affection also: calling
me her more than brother, her only friend, her last hope, she pathetically
conjured me not to cease to love her; and with encreased anxiety she departed
for London, the scene and cause of all her misery.


The scenes that followed, convinced her that she had not yet fathomed the
obscure gulph into which she had plunged. Her unhappiness assumed every day a
new shape; every day some unexpected event seemed to close, while in fact it
led onward, the train of calamities which now befell her.


The selected passion of the soul of Raymond was ambition. Readiness of talent,
a capacity of entering into, and leading the dispositions of men; earnest
desire of distinction were the awakeners and nurses of his ambition. But other
ingredients mingled with these, and prevented him from becoming the
calculating, determined character, which alone forms a successful hero. He was
obstinate, but not firm; benevolent in his first movements; harsh and reckless
when provoked. Above all, he was remorseless and unyielding in the pursuit of
any object of desire, however lawless. Love of pleasure, and the softer
sensibilities of our nature, made a prominent part of his character, conquering
the conqueror; holding him in at the moment of acquisition; sweeping away
ambition’s web; making him forget the toil of weeks, for the sake of one
moment’s indulgence of the new and actual object of his wishes. Obeying
these impulses, he had become the husband of Perdita: egged on by them, he
found himself the lover of Evadne. He had now lost both. He had neither the
ennobling self-gratulation, which constancy inspires, to console him, nor the
voluptuous sense of abandonment to a forbidden, but intoxicating passion. His
heart was exhausted by the recent events; his enjoyment of life was destroyed
by the resentment of Perdita, and the flight of Evadne; and the inflexibility
of the former, set the last seal upon the annihilation of his hopes. As long as
their disunion remained a secret, he cherished an expectation of re-awakening
past tenderness in her bosom; now that we were all made acquainted with these
occurrences, and that Perdita, by declaring her resolves to others, in a manner
pledged herself to their accomplishment, he gave up the idea of re-union as
futile, and sought only, since he was unable to influence her to change, to
reconcile himself to the present state of things. He made a vow against love
and its train of struggles, disappointment and remorse, and sought in mere
sensual enjoyment, a remedy for the injurious inroads of passion.


Debasement of character is the certain follower of such pursuits. Yet this
consequence would not have been immediately remarkable, if Raymond had
continued to apply himself to the execution of his plans for the public
benefit, and the fulfilling his duties as Protector. But, extreme in all
things, given up to immediate impressions, he entered with ardour into this new
pursuit of pleasure, and followed up the incongruous intimacies occasioned by
it without reflection or foresight. The council-chamber was deserted; the
crowds which attended on him as agents to his various projects were neglected.
Festivity, and even libertinism, became the order of the day.


Perdita beheld with affright the encreasing disorder. For a moment she thought
that she could stem the torrent, and that Raymond could be induced to hear
reason from her.—Vain hope! The moment of her influence was passed. He
listened with haughtiness, replied disdainfully; and, if in truth, she
succeeded in awakening his conscience, the sole effect was that he sought an
opiate for the pang in oblivious riot. With the energy natural to her, Perdita
then endeavoured to supply his place. Their still apparent union permitted her
to do much; but no woman could, in the end, present a remedy to the encreasing
negligence of the Protector; who, as if seized with a paroxysm of insanity,
trampled on all ceremony, all order, all duty, and gave himself up to license.


Reports of these strange proceedings reached us, and we were undecided what
method to adopt to restore our friend to himself and his country, when Perdita
suddenly appeared among us. She detailed the progress of the mournful change,
and entreated Adrian and myself to go up to London, and endeavour to remedy the
encreasing evil:—“Tell him,” she cried, “tell Lord
Raymond, that my presence shall no longer annoy him. That he need not plunge
into this destructive dissipation for the sake of disgusting me, and causing me
to fly. This purpose is now accomplished; he will never see me more. But let
me, it is my last entreaty, let me in the praises of his countrymen and the
prosperity of England, find the choice of my youth justified.”


During our ride up to town, Adrian and I discussed and argued upon
Raymond’s conduct, and his falling off from the hopes of permanent
excellence on his part, which he had before given us cause to entertain. My
friend and I had both been educated in one school, or rather I was his pupil in
the opinion, that steady adherence to principle was the only road to honour; a
ceaseless observance of the laws of general utility, the only conscientious aim
of human ambition. But though we both entertained these ideas, we differed in
their application. Resentment added also a sting to my censure; and I
reprobated Raymond’s conduct in severe terms. Adrian was more benign,
more considerate. He admitted that the principles that I laid down were the
best; but he denied that they were the only ones. Quoting the text, there
are many mansions in my father’s house, he insisted that the modes of
becoming good or great, varied as much as the dispositions of men, of whom it
might be said, as of the leaves of the forest, there were no two alike.


We arrived in London at about eleven at night. We conjectured, notwithstanding
what we had heard, that we should find Raymond in St. Stephen’s: thither
we sped. The chamber was full—but there was no Protector; and there was
an austere discontent manifest on the countenances of the leaders, and a
whispering and busy tattle among the underlings, not less ominous. We hastened
to the palace of the Protectorate. We found Raymond in his dining room with six
others: the bottle was being pushed about merrily, and had made considerable
inroads on the understanding of one or two. He who sat near Raymond was telling
a story, which convulsed the rest with laughter.


Raymond sat among them, though while he entered into the spirit of the hour,
his natural dignity never forsook him. He was gay, playful,
fascinating—but never did he overstep the modesty of nature, or the
respect due to himself, in his wildest sallies. Yet I own, that considering the
task which Raymond had taken on himself as Protector of England, and the cares
to which it became him to attend, I was exceedingly provoked to observe the
worthless fellows on whom his time was wasted, and the jovial if not drunken
spirit which seemed on the point of robbing him of his better self. I stood
watching the scene, while Adrian flitted like a shadow in among them, and, by a
word and look of sobriety, endeavoured to restore order in the assembly.
Raymond expressed himself delighted to see him, declaring that he should make
one in the festivity of the night.


This action of Adrian provoked me. I was indignant that he should sit at the
same table with the companions of Raymond—men of abandoned characters, or
rather without any, the refuse of high-bred luxury, the disgrace of their
country. “Let me entreat Adrian,” I cried, “not to comply:
rather join with me in endeavouring to withdraw Lord Raymond from this scene,
and restore him to other society.”


“My good fellow,” said Raymond, “this is neither the time nor
place for the delivery of a moral lecture: take my word for it that my
amusements and society are not so bad as you imagine. We are neither hypocrites
or fools —for the rest, ‘Dost thou think because thou art virtuous,
there shall be no more cakes and ale?’”


I turned angrily away: “Verney,” said Adrian, “you are very
cynical: sit down; or if you will not, perhaps, as you are not a frequent
visitor, Lord Raymond will humour you, and accompany us, as we had previously
agreed upon, to parliament.”


Raymond looked keenly at him; he could read benignity only in his gentle
lineaments; he turned to me, observing with scorn my moody and stern demeanour.
“Come,” said Adrian, “I have promised for you, enable me to
keep my engagement. Come with us.”—Raymond made an uneasy movement,
and laconically replied—“I won’t!”


The party in the mean time had broken up. They looked at the pictures, strolled
into the other apartments, talked of billiards, and one by one vanished.
Raymond strode angrily up and down the room. I stood ready to receive and reply
to his reproaches. Adrian leaned against the wall. “This is infinitely
ridiculous,” he cried, “if you were school-boys, you could not
conduct yourselves more unreasonably.”


“You do not understand,” said Raymond. “This is only part of
a system:—a scheme of tyranny to which I will never submit. Because I am
Protector of England, am I to be the only slave in its empire? My privacy
invaded, my actions censured, my friends insulted? But I will get rid of the
whole together.—Be you witnesses,” and he took the star, insignia
of office, from his breast, and threw it on the table. “I renounce my
office, I abdicate my power—assume it who will!”—-


“Let him assume it,” exclaimed Adrian, “who can pronounce
himself, or whom the world will pronounce to be your superior. There does not
exist the man in England with adequate presumption. Know yourself, Raymond, and
your indignation will cease; your complacency return. A few months ago,
whenever we prayed for the prosperity of our country, or our own, we at the
same time prayed for the life and welfare of the Protector, as indissolubly
linked to it. Your hours were devoted to our benefit, your ambition was to
obtain our commendation. You decorated our towns with edifices, you bestowed on
us useful establishments, you gifted the soil with abundant fertility. The
powerful and unjust cowered at the steps of your judgment-seat, and the poor
and oppressed arose like morn-awakened flowers under the sunshine of your
protection.


“Can you wonder that we are all aghast and mourn, when this appears
changed? But, come, this splenetic fit is already passed; resume your
functions; your partizans will hail you; your enemies be silenced; our love,
honour, and duty will again be manifested towards you. Master yourself,
Raymond, and the world is subject to you.”


“All this would be very good sense, if addressed to another,”
replied Raymond, moodily, “con the lesson yourself, and you, the first
peer of the land, may become its sovereign. You the good, the wise, the just,
may rule all hearts. But I perceive, too soon for my own happiness, too late
for England’s good, that I undertook a task to which I am unequal. I
cannot rule myself. My passions are my masters; my smallest impulse my tyrant.
Do you think that I renounced the Protectorate (and I have renounced it) in a
fit of spleen? By the God that lives, I swear never to take up that bauble
again; never again to burthen myself with the weight of care and misery, of
which that is the visible sign.


“Once I desired to be a king. It was in the hey-day of youth, in the
pride of boyish folly. I knew myself when I renounced it. I renounced it to
gain —no matter what—for that also I have lost. For many months I
have submitted to this mock majesty—this solemn jest. I am its dupe no
longer. I will be free.


“I have lost that which adorned and dignified my life; that which linked
me to other men. Again I am a solitary man; and I will become again, as in my
early years, a wanderer, a soldier of fortune. My friends, for Verney, I feel
that you are my friend, do not endeavour to shake my resolve. Perdita, wedded
to an imagination, careless of what is behind the veil, whose charactery is in
truth faulty and vile, Perdita has renounced me. With her it was pretty enough
to play a sovereign’s part; and, as in the recesses of your beloved
forest we acted masques, and imagined ourselves Arcadian shepherds, to please
the fancy of the moment—so was I content, more for Perdita’s sake
than my own, to take on me the character of one of the great ones of the earth;
to lead her behind the scenes of grandeur, to vary her life with a short act of
magnificence and power. This was to be the colour; love and confidence the
substance of our existence. But we must live, and not act our lives; pursuing
the shadow, I lost the reality—now I renounce both.


“Adrian, I am about to return to Greece, to become again a soldier,
perhaps a conqueror. Will you accompany me? You will behold new scenes; see a
new people; witness the mighty struggle there going forward between
civilization and barbarism; behold, and perhaps direct the efforts of a young
and vigorous population, for liberty and order. Come with me. I have expected
you. I waited for this moment; all is prepared;—will you accompany
me?”


“I will,” replied Adrian. “Immediately?”


“To-morrow if you will.”


“Reflect!” I cried.


“Wherefore?” asked Raymond—“My dear fellow, I have done
nothing else than reflect on this step the live-long summer; and be assured
that Adrian has condensed an age of reflection into this little moment. Do not
talk of reflection; from this moment I abjure it; this is my only happy moment
during a long interval of time. I must go, Lionel—the Gods will it; and I
must. Do not endeavour to deprive me of my companion, the out-cast’s
friend.


“One word more concerning unkind, unjust Perdita. For a time, I thought
that, by watching a complying moment, fostering the still warm ashes, I might
relume in her the flame of love. It is more cold within her, than a fire left
by gypsies in winter-time, the spent embers crowned by a pyramid of snow. Then,
in endeavouring to do violence to my own disposition, I made all worse than
before. Still I think, that time, and even absence, may restore her to me.
Remember, that I love her still, that my dearest hope is that she will again be
mine. I know, though she does not, how false the veil is which she has spread
over the reality—do not endeavour to rend this deceptive covering, but by
degrees withdraw it. Present her with a mirror, in which she may know herself;
and, when she is an adept in that necessary but difficult science, she will
wonder at her present mistake, and hasten to restore to me, what is by right
mine, her forgiveness, her kind thoughts, her love.”

</div></body></text></TEI>