<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="14">
CHAPTER I.

During this voyage, when on calm evenings we conversed on deck, watching the
glancing of the waves and the changeful appearances of the sky, I discovered
the total revolution that the disasters of Raymond had wrought in the mind of
my sister. Were they the same waters of love, which, lately cold and cutting as
ice, repelling as that, now loosened from their frozen chains, flowed through
the regions of her soul in gushing and grateful exuberance? She did not believe
that he was dead, but she knew that he was in danger, and the hope of assisting
in his liberation, and the idea of soothing by tenderness the ills that he
might have undergone, elevated and harmonized the late jarring element of her
being. I was not so sanguine as she as to the result of our voyage. She was not
sanguine, but secure; and the expectation of seeing the lover she had banished,
the husband, friend, heart’s companion from whom she had long been
alienated, wrapt her senses in delight, her mind in placidity. It was beginning
life again; it was leaving barren sands for an abode of fertile beauty; it was
a harbour after a tempest, an opiate after sleepless nights, a happy waking
from a terrible dream.


Little Clara accompanied us; the poor child did not well understand what was
going forward. She heard that we were bound for Greece, that she would see her
father, and now, for the first time, she prattled of him to her mother.


On landing at Athens we found difficulties encrease upon us: nor could the
storied earth or balmy atmosphere inspire us with enthusiasm or pleasure, while
the fate of Raymond was in jeopardy. No man had ever excited so strong an
interest in the public mind; this was apparent even among the phlegmatic
English, from whom he had long been absent. The Athenians had expected their
hero to return in triumph; the women had taught their children to lisp his name
joined to thanksgiving; his manly beauty, his courage, his devotion to their
cause, made him appear in their eyes almost as one of the ancient deities of
the soil descended from their native Olympus to defend them. When they spoke of
his probable death and certain captivity, tears streamed from their eyes; even
as the women of Syria sorrowed for Adonis, did the wives and mothers of Greece
lament our English Raymond—Athens was a city of mourning.


All these shews of despair struck Perdita with affright. With that sanguine but
confused expectation, which desire engendered while she was at a distance from
reality, she had formed an image in her mind of instantaneous change, when she
should set her foot on Grecian shores. She fancied that Raymond would already
be free, and that her tender attentions would come to entirely obliterate even
the memory of his mischance. But his fate was still uncertain; she began to
fear the worst, and to feel that her soul’s hope was cast on a chance
that might prove a blank. The wife and lovely child of Lord Raymond became
objects of intense interest in Athens. The gates of their abode were besieged,
audible prayers were breathed for his restoration; all these circumstances
added to the dismay and fears of Perdita.


My exertions were unremitted: after a time I left Athens, and joined the army
stationed at Kishan in Thrace. Bribery, threats, and intrigue, soon discovered
the secret that Raymond was alive, a prisoner, suffering the most rigorous
confinement and wanton cruelties. We put in movement every impulse of policy
and money to redeem him from their hands.


The impatience of my sister’s disposition now returned on her, awakened
by repentance, sharpened by remorse. The very beauty of the Grecian climate,
during the season of spring, added torture to her sensations. The unexampled
loveliness of the flower-clad earth—the genial sunshine and grateful
shade—the melody of the birds—the majesty of the woods— the
splendour of the marble ruins—the clear effulgence of the stars by
night—the combination of all that was exciting and voluptuous in this
transcending land, by inspiring a quicker spirit of life and an added
sensitiveness to every articulation of her frame, only gave edge to the
poignancy of her grief. Each long hour was counted, and “He
suffers” was the burthen of all her thoughts. She abstained from
food; she lay on the bare earth, and, by such mimickry of his enforced
torments, endeavoured to hold communion with his distant pain. I remembered in
one of her harshest moments a quotation of mine had roused her to anger and
disdain. “Perdita,” I had said, “some day you will discover
that you have done wrong in again casting Raymond on the thorns of life. When
disappointment has sullied his beauty, when a soldier’s hardships have
bent his manly form, and loneliness made even triumph bitter to him, then you
will repent; and regret for the irreparable change


“will move
        In hearts all rocky now, the late remorse of
love.”[1]


The stinging “remorse of love” now pierced her heart. She accused
herself of his journey to Greece—his dangers—his imprisonment. She
pictured to herself the anguish of his solitude; she remembered with what eager
delight he had in former days made her the partner of his joyful hopes—
with what grateful affection he received her sympathy in his cares. She called
to mind how often he had declared that solitude was to him the greatest of all
evils, and how death itself was to him more full of fear and pain when he
pictured to himself a lonely grave. “My best girl,” he had said,
“relieves me from these phantasies. United to her, cherished in her dear
heart, never again shall I know the misery of finding myself alone. Even if I
die before you, my Perdita, treasure up my ashes till yours may mingle with
mine. It is a foolish sentiment for one who is not a materialist, yet,
methinks, even in that dark cell, I may feel that my inanimate dust mingles
with yours, and thus have a companion in decay.” In her resentful mood,
these expressions had been remembered with acrimony and disdain; they visited
her in her softened hour, taking sleep from her eyes, all hope of rest from her
uneasy mind.


Two months passed thus, when at last we obtained a promise of Raymond’s
release. Confinement and hardship had undermined his health; the Turks feared
an accomplishment of the threats of the English government, if he died under
their hands; they looked upon his recovery as impossible; they delivered him up
as a dying man, willingly making over to us the rites of burial.


He came by sea from Constantinople to Athens. The wind, favourable to him, blew
so strongly in shore, that we were unable, as we had at first intended, to meet
him on his watery road. The watchtower of Athens was besieged by inquirers,
each sail eagerly looked out for; till on the first of May the gallant frigate
bore in sight, freighted with treasure more invaluable than the wealth which,
piloted from Mexico, the vexed Pacific swallowed, or that was conveyed over its
tranquil bosom to enrich the crown of Spain. At early dawn the vessel was
discovered bearing in shore; it was conjectured that it would cast anchor about
five miles from land. The news spread through Athens, and the whole city poured
out at the gate of the Piraeus, down the roads, through the vineyards, the
olive woods and plantations of fig-trees, towards the harbour. The noisy joy of
the populace, the gaudy colours of their dress, the tumult of carriages and
horses, the march of soldiers intermixed, the waving of banners and sound of
martial music added to the high excitement of the scene; while round us reposed
in solemn majesty the relics of antient time. To our right the Acropolis rose
high, spectatress of a thousand changes, of ancient glory, Turkish slavery, and
the restoration of dear-bought liberty; tombs and cenotaphs were strewed thick
around, adorned by ever renewing vegetation; the mighty dead hovered over their
monuments, and beheld in our enthusiasm and congregated numbers a renewal of
the scenes in which they had been the actors. Perdita and Clara rode in a close
carriage; I attended them on horseback. At length we arrived at the harbour; it
was agitated by the outward swell of the sea; the beach, as far could be
discerned, was covered by a moving multitude, which, urged by those behind
toward the sea, again rushed back as the heavy waves with sullen roar burst
close to them. I applied my glass, and could discern that the frigate had
already cast anchor, fearful of the danger of approaching nearer to a lee
shore: a boat was lowered; with a pang I saw that Raymond was unable to descend
the vessel’s side; he was let down in a chair, and lay wrapt in cloaks at
the bottom of the boat.


I dismounted, and called to some sailors who were rowing about the harbour to
pull up, and take me into their skiff; Perdita at the same moment alighted from
her carriage—she seized my arm—“Take me with you,” she
cried; she was trembling and pale; Clara clung to her—“You must
not,” I said, “the sea is rough—he will soon be here—do
you not see his boat?” The little bark to which I had beckoned had now
pulled up; before I could stop her, Perdita, assisted by the sailors was in
it—Clara followed her mother—a loud shout echoed from the crowd as
we pulled out of the inner harbour; while my sister at the prow, had caught
hold of one of the men who was using a glass, asking a thousand questions,
careless of the spray that broke over her, deaf, sightless to all, except the
little speck that, just visible on the top of the waves, evidently neared. We
approached with all the speed six rowers could give; the orderly and
picturesque dress of the soldiers on the beach, the sounds of exulting music,
the stirring breeze and waving flags, the unchecked exclamations of the eager
crowd, whose dark looks and foreign garb were purely eastern; the sight of
temple-crowned rock, the white marble of the buildings glittering in the sun,
and standing in bright relief against the dark ridge of lofty mountains beyond;
the near roar of the sea, the splash of oars, and dash of spray, all steeped my
soul in a delirium, unfelt, unimagined in the common course of common life.
Trembling, I was unable to continue to look through the glass with which I had
watched the motion of the crew, when the frigate’s boat had first been
launched. We rapidly drew near, so that at length the number and forms of those
within could be discerned; its dark sides grew big, and the splash of its oars
became audible: I could distinguish the languid form of my friend, as he half
raised himself at our approach.


Perdita’s questions had ceased; she leaned on my arm, panting with
emotions too acute for tears—our men pulled alongside the other boat. As
a last effort, my sister mustered her strength, her firmness; she stepped from
one boat to the other, and then with a shriek she sprang towards Raymond, knelt
at his side, and glueing her lips to the hand she seized, her face shrouded by
her long hair, gave herself up to tears.


Raymond had somewhat raised himself at our approach, but it was with difficulty
that he exerted himself even thus much. With sunken cheek and hollow eyes, pale
and gaunt, how could I recognize the beloved of Perdita? I continued awe-struck
and mute—he looked smilingly on the poor girl; the smile was his. A day
of sun-shine falling on a dark valley, displays its before hidden
characteristics; and now this smile, the same with which he first spoke love to
Perdita, with which he had welcomed the protectorate, playing on his altered
countenance, made me in my heart’s core feel that this was Raymond.


He stretched out to me his other hand; I discerned the trace of manacles on his
bared wrist. I heard my sister’s sobs, and thought, happy are women who
can weep, and in a passionate caress disburthen the oppression of their
feelings; shame and habitual restraint hold back a man. I would have given
worlds to have acted as in days of boyhood, have strained him to my breast,
pressed his hand to my lips, and wept over him; my swelling heart choked me;
the natural current would not be checked; the big rebellious tears gathered in
my eyes; I turned aside, and they dropped in the sea—they came fast and
faster;—yet I could hardly be ashamed, for I saw that the rough sailors
were not unmoved, and Raymond’s eyes alone were dry from among our crew.
He lay in that blessed calm which convalescence always induces, enjoying in
secure tranquillity his liberty and re-union with her whom he adored. Perdita
at length subdued her burst of passion, and rose, —she looked round for
Clara; the child frightened, not recognizing her father, and neglected by us,
had crept to the other end of the boat; she came at her mother’s call.
Perdita presented her to Raymond; her first words were: “Beloved, embrace
our child!”


“Come hither, sweet one,” said her father, “do you not know
me?” she knew his voice, and cast herself in his arms with half bashful
but uncontrollable emotion.


Perceiving the weakness of Raymond, I was afraid of ill consequences from the
pressure of the crowd on his landing. But they were awed as I had been, at the
change of his appearance. The music died away, the shouts abruptly ended; the
soldiers had cleared a space in which a carriage was drawn up. He was placed in
it; Perdita and Clara entered with him, and his escort closed round it; a
hollow murmur, akin to the roaring of the near waves, went through the
multitude; they fell back as the carriage advanced, and fearful of injuring him
they had come to welcome, by loud testimonies of joy, they satisfied themselves
with bending in a low salaam as the carriage passed; it went slowly along the
road of the Piraeus; passed by antique temple and heroic tomb, beneath the
craggy rock of the citadel. The sound of the waves was left behind; that of the
multitude continued at intervals, supressed and hoarse; and though, in the
city, the houses, churches, and public buildings were decorated with tapestry
and banners—though the soldiery lined the streets, and the inhabitants in
thousands were assembled to give him hail, the same solemn silence prevailed,
the soldiery presented arms, the banners vailed, many a white hand waved a
streamer, and vainly sought to discern the hero in the vehicle, which, closed
and encompassed by the city guards, drew him to the palace allotted for his
abode.


Raymond was weak and exhausted, yet the interest he perceived to be excited on
his account, filled him with proud pleasure. He was nearly killed with
kindness. It is true, the populace retained themselves; but there arose a
perpetual hum and bustle from the throng round the palace, which added to the
noise of fireworks, the frequent explosion of arms, the tramp to and fro of
horsemen and carriages, to which effervescence he was the focus, retarded his
recovery. So we retired awhile to Eleusis, and here rest and tender care added
each day to the strength of our invalid. The zealous attention of Perdita
claimed the first rank in the causes which induced his rapid recovery; but the
second was surely the delight he felt in the affection and good will of the
Greeks. We are said to love much those whom we greatly benefit. Raymond had
fought and conquered for the Athenians; he had suffered, on their account,
peril, imprisonment, and hardship; their gratitude affected him deeply, and he
inly vowed to unite his fate for ever to that of a people so enthusiastically
devoted to him.


Social feeling and sympathy constituted a marked feature in my disposition. In
early youth, the living drama acted around me, drew me heart and soul into its
vortex. I was now conscious of a change. I loved, I hoped, I enjoyed; but there
was something besides this. I was inquisitive as to the internal principles of
action of those around me: anxious to read their thoughts justly, and for ever
occupied in divining their inmost mind. All events, at the same time that they
deeply interested me, arranged themselves in pictures before me. I gave the
right place to every personage in the groupe, the just balance to every
sentiment. This undercurrent of thought, often soothed me amidst distress, and
even agony. It gave ideality to that, from which, taken in naked truth, the
soul would have revolted: it bestowed pictorial colours on misery and disease,
and not unfrequently relieved me from despair in deplorable changes. This
faculty, or instinct, was now rouzed. I watched the re-awakened devotion of my
sister; Clara’s timid, but concentrated admiration of her father, and
Raymond’s appetite for renown, and sensitiveness to the demonstrations of
affection of the Athenians. Attentively perusing this animated volume, I was
the less surprised at the tale I read on the new-turned page.


The Turkish army were at this time besieging Rodosto; and the Greeks, hastening
their preparations, and sending each day reinforcements, were on the eve of
forcing the enemy to battle. Each people looked on the coming struggle as that
which would be to a great degree decisive; as, in case of victory, the next
step would be the siege of Constantinople by the Greeks. Raymond, being
somewhat recovered, prepared to re-assume his command in the army.


Perdita did not oppose herself to his determination. She only stipulated to be
permitted to accompany him. She had set down no rule of conduct for herself;
but for her life she could not have opposed his slightest wish, or do other
than acquiesce cheerfully in all his projects. One word, in truth, had alarmed
her more than battles or sieges, during which she trusted Raymond’s high
command would exempt him from danger. That word, as yet it was not more to her,
was PLAGUE. This enemy to the human race had begun early in June to raise its
serpent-head on the shores of the Nile; parts of Asia, not usually subject to
this evil, were infected. It was in Constantinople; but as each year that city
experienced a like visitation, small attention was paid to those accounts which
declared more people to have died there already, than usually made up the
accustomed prey of the whole of the hotter months. However it might be, neither
plague nor war could prevent Perdita from following her lord, or induce her to
utter one objection to the plans which he proposed. To be near him, to be loved
by him, to feel him again her own, was the limit of her desires. The object of
her life was to do him pleasure: it had been so before, but with a difference.
In past times, without thought or foresight she had made him happy, being so
herself, and in any question of choice, consulted her own wishes, as being one
with his. Now she sedulously put herself out of the question, sacrificing even
her anxiety for his health and welfare to her resolve not to oppose any of his
desires. Love of the Greek people, appetite for glory, and hatred of the
barbarian government under which he had suffered even to the approach of death,
stimulated him. He wished to repay the kindness of the Athenians, to keep alive
the splendid associations connected with his name, and to eradicate from Europe
a power which, while every other nation advanced in civilization, stood still,
a monument of antique barbarism. Having effected the reunion of Raymond and
Perdita, I was eager to return to England; but his earnest request, added to
awakening curiosity, and an indefinable anxiety to behold the catastrophe, now
apparently at hand, in the long drawn history of Grecian and Turkish warfare,
induced me to consent to prolong until the autumn, the period of my residence
in Greece.


As soon as the health of Raymond was sufficiently re-established, he prepared
to join the Grecian camp, near Kishan, a town of some importance, situated to
the east of the Hebrus; in which Perdita and Clara were to remain until the
event of the expected battle. We quitted Athens on the 2nd of June. Raymond had
recovered from the gaunt and pallid looks of fever. If I no longer saw the
fresh glow of youth on his matured countenance, if care had besieged his brow,


“And dug deep trenches in his beauty’s
field,”[2]


if his hair, slightly mingled with grey, and his look, considerate even in its
eagerness, gave signs of added years and past sufferings, yet there was
something irresistibly affecting in the sight of one, lately snatched from the
grave, renewing his career, untamed by sickness or disaster. The Athenians saw
in him, not as heretofore, the heroic boy or desperate man, who was ready to
die for them; but the prudent commander, who for their sakes was careful of his
life, and could make his own warrior-propensities second to the scheme of
conduct policy might point out.


All Athens accompanied us for several miles. When he had landed a month ago,
the noisy populace had been hushed by sorrow and fear; but this was a festival
day to all. The air resounded with their shouts; their picturesque costume, and
the gay colours of which it was composed, flaunted in the sunshine; their eager
gestures and rapid utterance accorded with their wild appearance. Raymond was
the theme of every tongue, the hope of each wife, mother or betrothed bride,
whose husband, child, or lover, making a part of the Greek army, were to be
conducted to victory by him.


Notwithstanding the hazardous object of our journey, it was full of romantic
interest, as we passed through the vallies, and over the hills, of this divine
country. Raymond was inspirited by the intense sensations of recovered health;
he felt that in being general of the Athenians, he filled a post worthy of his
ambition; and, in his hope of the conquest of Constantinople, he counted on an
event which would be as a landmark in the waste of ages, an exploit unequalled
in the annals of man; when a city of grand historic association, the beauty of
whose site was the wonder of the world, which for many hundred years had been
the strong hold of the Moslems, should be rescued from slavery and barbarism,
and restored to a people illustrious for genius, civilization, and a spirit of
liberty. Perdita rested on his restored society, on his love, his hopes and
fame, even as a Sybarite on a luxurious couch; every thought was transport,
each emotion bathed as it were in a congenial and balmy element.


We arrived at Kishan on the 7th of July. The weather during our journey had
been serene. Each day, before dawn, we left our night’s encampment, and
watched the shadows as they retreated from hill and valley, and the golden
splendour of the sun’s approach. The accompanying soldiers received, with
national vivacity, enthusiastic pleasure from the sight of beautiful nature.
The uprising of the star of day was hailed by triumphant strains, while the
birds, heard by snatches, filled up the intervals of the music. At noon, we
pitched our tents in some shady valley, or embowering wood among the mountains,
while a stream prattling over pebbles induced grateful sleep. Our evening
march, more calm, was yet more delightful than the morning restlessness of
spirit. If the band played, involuntarily they chose airs of moderated passion;
the farewell of love, or lament at absence, was followed and closed by some
solemn hymn, which harmonized with the tranquil loveliness of evening, and
elevated the soul to grand and religious thought. Often all sounds were
suspended, that we might listen to the nightingale, while the fire-flies danced
in bright measure, and the soft cooing of the aziolo spoke of fair weather to
the travellers. Did we pass a valley? Soft shades encompassed us, and rocks
tinged with beauteous hues. If we traversed a mountain, Greece, a living map,
was spread beneath, her renowned pinnacles cleaving the ether; her rivers
threading in silver line the fertile land. Afraid almost to breathe, we English
travellers surveyed with extasy this splendid landscape, so different from the
sober hues and melancholy graces of our native scenery. When we quitted
Macedonia, the fertile but low plains of Thrace afforded fewer beauties; yet
our journey continued to be interesting. An advanced guard gave information of
our approach, and the country people were quickly in motion to do honour to
Lord Raymond. The villages were decorated by triumphal arches of greenery by
day, and lamps by night; tapestry waved from the windows, the ground was
strewed with flowers, and the name of Raymond, joined to that of Greece, was
echoed in the Evive of the peasant crowd.


When we arrived at Kishan, we learnt, that on hearing of the advance of Lord
Raymond and his detachment, the Turkish army had retreated from Rodosto; but
meeting with a reinforcement, they had re-trod their steps. In the meantime,
Argyropylo, the Greek commander-in-chief, had advanced, so as to be between the
Turks and Rodosto; a battle, it was said, was inevitable. Perdita and her child
were to remain at Kishan. Raymond asked me, if I would not continue with them.
“Now by the fells of Cumberland,” I cried, “by all of the
vagabond and poacher that appertains to me, I will stand at your side, draw my
sword in the Greek cause, and be hailed as a victor along with you!”


All the plain, from Kishan to Rodosto, a distance of sixteen leagues, was alive
with troops, or with the camp-followers, all in motion at the approach of a
battle. The small garrisons were drawn from the various towns and fortresses,
and went to swell the main army. We met baggage waggons, and many females of
high and low rank returning to Fairy or Kishan, there to wait the issue of the
expected day. When we arrived at Rodosto, we found that the field had been
taken, and the scheme of the battle arranged. The sound of firing, early on the
following morning, informed us that advanced posts of the armies were engaged.
Regiment after regiment advanced, their colours flying and bands playing. They
planted the cannon on the tumuli, sole elevations in this level country, and
formed themselves into column and hollow square; while the pioneers threw up
small mounds for their protection.


These then were the preparations for a battle, nay, the battle itself; far
different from any thing the imagination had pictured. We read of centre and
wing in Greek and Roman history; we fancy a spot, plain as a table, and
soldiers small as chessmen; and drawn forth, so that the most ignorant of the
game can discover science and order in the disposition of the forces. When I
came to the reality, and saw regiments file off to the left far out of sight,
fields intervening between the battalions, but a few troops sufficiently near
me to observe their motions, I gave up all idea of understanding, even of
seeing a battle, but attaching myself to Raymond attended with intense interest
to his actions. He shewed himself collected, gallant and imperial; his commands
were prompt, his intuition of the events of the day to me miraculous. In the
mean time the cannon roared; the music lifted up its enlivening voice at
intervals; and we on the highest of the mounds I mentioned, too far off to
observe the fallen sheaves which death gathered into his storehouse, beheld the
regiments, now lost in smoke, now banners and staves peering above the cloud,
while shout and clamour drowned every sound.


Early in the day, Argyropylo was wounded dangerously, and Raymond assumed the
command of the whole army. He made few remarks, till, on observing through his
glass the sequel of an order he had given, his face, clouded for awhile with
doubt, became radiant. “The day is ours,” he cried, “the
Turks fly from the bayonet.” And then swiftly he dispatched his
aides-de-camp to command the horse to fall on the routed enemy. The defeat
became total; the cannon ceased to roar; the infantry rallied, and horse
pursued the flying Turks along the dreary plain; the staff of Raymond was
dispersed in various directions, to make observations, and bear commands. Even
I was dispatched to a distant part of the field.


The ground on which the battle was fought, was a level plain—so level,
that from the tumuli you saw the waving line of mountains on the wide-stretched
horizon; yet the intervening space was unvaried by the least irregularity, save
such undulations as resembled the waves of the sea. The whole of this part of
Thrace had been so long a scene of contest, that it had remained uncultivated,
and presented a dreary, barren appearance. The order I had received, was to
make an observation of the direction which a detachment of the enemy might have
taken, from a northern tumulus; the whole Turkish army, followed by the Greek,
had poured eastward; none but the dead remained in the direction of my side.
From the top of the mound, I looked far round—all was silent and
deserted.


The last beams of the nearly sunken sun shot up from behind the far summit of
Mount Athos; the sea of Marmora still glittered beneath its rays, while the
Asiatic coast beyond was half hid in a haze of low cloud. Many a casque, and
bayonet, and sword, fallen from unnerved arms, reflected the departing ray;
they lay scattered far and near. From the east, a band of ravens, old
inhabitants of the Turkish cemeteries, came sailing along towards their
harvest; the sun disappeared. This hour, melancholy yet sweet, has always
seemed to me the time when we are most naturally led to commune with higher
powers; our mortal sternness departs, and gentle complacency invests the soul.
But now, in the midst of the dying and the dead, how could a thought of heaven
or a sensation of tranquillity possess one of the murderers? During the busy
day, my mind had yielded itself a willing slave to the state of things
presented to it by its fellow-beings; historical association, hatred of the
foe, and military enthusiasm had held dominion over me. Now, I looked on the
evening star, as softly and calmly it hung pendulous in the orange hues of
sunset. I turned to the corse-strewn earth; and felt ashamed of my species. So
perhaps were the placid skies; for they quickly veiled themselves in mist, and
in this change assisted the swift disappearance of twilight usual in the south;
heavy masses of cloud floated up from the south east, and red and turbid
lightning shot from their dark edges; the rushing wind disturbed the garments
of the dead, and was chilled as it passed over their icy forms. Darkness
gathered round; the objects about me became indistinct, I descended from my
station, and with difficulty guided my horse, so as to avoid the slain.


Suddenly I heard a piercing shriek; a form seemed to rise from the earth; it
flew swiftly towards me, sinking to the ground again as it drew near. All this
passed so suddenly, that I with difficulty reined in my horse, so that it
should not trample on the prostrate being. The dress of this person was that of
a soldier, but the bared neck and arms, and the continued shrieks discovered a
female thus disguised. I dismounted to her aid, while she, with heavy groans,
and her hand placed on her side, resisted my attempt to lead her on. In the
hurry of the moment I forgot that I was in Greece, and in my native accents
endeavoured to soothe the sufferer. With wild and terrific exclamations did the
lost, dying Evadne (for it was she) recognize the language of her lover; pain
and fever from her wound had deranged her intellects, while her piteous cries
and feeble efforts to escape, penetrated me with compassion. In wild delirium
she called upon the name of Raymond; she exclaimed that I was keeping him from
her, while the Turks with fearful instruments of torture were about to take his
life. Then again she sadly lamented her hard fate; that a woman, with a
woman’s heart and sensibility, should be driven by hopeless love and
vacant hopes to take up the trade of arms, and suffer beyond the endurance of
man privation, labour, and pain—the while her dry, hot hand pressed mine,
and her brow and lips burned with consuming fire.


As her strength grew less, I lifted her from the ground; her emaciated form
hung over my arm, her sunken cheek rested on my breast; in a sepulchral voice
she murmured:—“This is the end of love!—Yet not the
end!”— and frenzy lent her strength as she cast her arm up to
heaven: “there is the end! there we meet again. Many living deaths have I
borne for thee, O Raymond, and now I expire, thy victim!—By my death I
purchase thee— lo! the instruments of war, fire, the plague are my
servitors. I dared, I conquered them all, till now! I have sold myself to
death, with the sole condition that thou shouldst follow me—Fire, and
war, and plague, unite for thy destruction—O my Raymond, there is no
safety for thee!”


With an heavy heart I listened to the changes of her delirium; I made her a bed
of cloaks; her violence decreased and a clammy dew stood on her brow as the
paleness of death succeeded to the crimson of fever, I placed her on the
cloaks. She continued to rave of her speedy meeting with her beloved in the
grave, of his death nigh at hand; sometimes she solemnly declared that he was
summoned; sometimes she bewailed his hard destiny. Her voice grew feebler, her
speech interrupted; a few convulsive movements, and her muscles relaxed, the
limbs fell, no more to be sustained, one deep sigh, and life was gone.


I bore her from the near neighbourhood of the dead; wrapt in cloaks, I placed
her beneath a tree. Once more I looked on her altered face; the last time I saw
her she was eighteen; beautiful as poet’s vision, splendid as a Sultana
of the East—Twelve years had past; twelve years of change, sorrow and
hardship; her brilliant complexion had become worn and dark, her limbs had lost
the roundness of youth and womanhood; her eyes had sunk deep,


        Crushed and o’erworn,
The hours had drained her blood, and filled her brow
With lines and wrinkles.


With shuddering horror I veiled this monument of human passion and human
misery; I heaped over her all of flags and heavy accoutrements I could find, to
guard her from birds and beasts of prey, until I could bestow on her a fitting
grave. Sadly and slowly I stemmed my course from among the heaps of slain, and,
guided by the twinkling lights of the town, at length reached Rodosto.


 [1]
Lord Byron’s Fourth Canto of Childe Harolde.


 [2]
Shakspeare’s Sonnets.

</div></body></text></TEI>