<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="24">
CHAPTER I.

Hear you not the rushing sound of the coming tempest? Do you not behold the
clouds open, and destruction lurid and dire pour down on the blasted earth? See
you not the thunderbolt fall, and are deafened by the shout of heaven that
follows its descent? Feel you not the earth quake and open with agonizing
groans, while the air is pregnant with shrieks and wailings,— all
announcing the last days of man? No! none of these things accompanied our fall!
The balmy air of spring, breathed from nature’s ambrosial home, invested
the lovely earth, which wakened as a young mother about to lead forth in pride
her beauteous offspring to meet their sire who had been long absent. The buds
decked the trees, the flowers adorned the land: the dark branches, swollen with
seasonable juices, expanded into leaves, and the variegated foliage of spring,
bending and singing in the breeze, rejoiced in the genial warmth of the
unclouded empyrean: the brooks flowed murmuring, the sea was waveless, and the
promontories that over-hung it were reflected in the placid waters; birds awoke
in the woods, while abundant food for man and beast sprung up from the dark
ground. Where was pain and evil? Not in the calm air or weltering ocean; not in
the woods or fertile fields, nor among the birds that made the woods resonant
with song, nor the animals that in the midst of plenty basked in the sunshine.
Our enemy, like the Calamity of Homer, trod our hearts, and no sound was echoed
from her steps—


With ills the land is rife, with ills the sea,
Diseases haunt our frail humanity,
Through noon, through night, on casual wing they glide,
Silent,—a voice the power all-wise denied.[19]


Once man was a favourite of the Creator, as the royal psalmist sang, “God
had made him a little lower than the angels, and had crowned him with glory and
honour. God made him to have dominion over the works of his hands, and put all
things under his feet.” Once it was so; now is man lord of the creation?
Look at him—ha! I see plague! She has invested his form, is incarnate in
his flesh, has entwined herself with his being, and blinds his heaven-seeking
eyes. Lie down, O man, on the flower-strown earth; give up all claim to your
inheritance, all you can ever possess of it is the small cell which the dead
require. Plague is the companion of spring, of sunshine, and plenty. We no
longer struggle with her. We have forgotten what we did when she was not. Of
old navies used to stem the giant ocean-waves betwixt Indus and the Pole for
slight articles of luxury. Men made perilous journies to possess themselves of
earth’s splendid trifles, gems and gold. Human labour was
wasted—human life set at nought. Now life is all that we covet; that this
automaton of flesh should, with joints and springs in order, perform its
functions, that this dwelling of the soul should be capable of containing its
dweller. Our minds, late spread abroad through countless spheres and endless
combinations of thought, now retrenched themselves behind this wall of flesh,
eager to preserve its well-being only. We were surely sufficiently degraded.


At first the increase of sickness in spring brought increase of toil to such of
us, who, as yet spared to life, bestowed our time and thoughts on our fellow
creatures. We nerved ourselves to the task: “in the midst of despair we
performed the tasks of hope.” We went out with the resolution of
disputing with our foe. We aided the sick, and comforted the sorrowing; turning
from the multitudinous dead to the rare survivors, with an energy of desire
that bore the resemblance of power, we bade them—live. Plague sat
paramount the while, and laughed us to scorn.


Have any of you, my readers, observed the ruins of an anthill immediately after
its destruction? At first it appears entirely deserted of its former
inhabitants; in a little time you see an ant struggling through the upturned
mould; they reappear by twos and threes, running hither and thither in search
of their lost companions. Such were we upon earth, wondering aghast at the
effects of pestilence. Our empty habitations remained, but the dwellers were
gathered to the shades of the tomb.


As the rules of order and pressure of laws were lost, some began with
hesitation and wonder to transgress the accustomed uses of society. Palaces
were deserted, and the poor man dared at length, unreproved, intrude into the
splendid apartments, whose very furniture and decorations were an unknown world
to him. It was found, that, though at first the stop put to all circulation of
property, had reduced those before supported by the factitious wants of society
to sudden and hideous poverty, yet when the boundaries of private possession
were thrown down, the products of human labour at present existing were more,
far more, than the thinned generation could possibly consume. To some among the
poor this was matter of exultation. We were all equal now; magnificent
dwellings, luxurious carpets, and beds of down, were afforded to all. Carriages
and horses, gardens, pictures, statues, and princely libraries, there were
enough of these even to superfluity; and there was nothing to prevent each from
assuming possession of his share. We were all equal now; but near at hand was
an equality still more levelling, a state where beauty and strength, and
wisdom, would be as vain as riches and birth. The grave yawned beneath us all,
and its prospect prevented any of us from enjoying the ease and plenty which in
so awful a manner was presented to us.


Still the bloom did not fade on the cheeks of my babes; and Clara sprung up in
years and growth, unsullied by disease. We had no reason to think the site of
Windsor Castle peculiarly healthy, for many other families had expired beneath
its roof; we lived therefore without any particular precaution; but we lived,
it seemed, in safety. If Idris became thin and pale, it was anxiety that
occasioned the change; an anxiety I could in no way alleviate. She never
complained, but sleep and appetite fled from her, a slow fever preyed on her
veins, her colour was hectic, and she often wept in secret; gloomy
prognostications, care, and agonizing dread, ate up the principle of life
within her. I could not fail to perceive this change. I often wished that I had
permitted her to take her own course, and engage herself in such labours for
the welfare of others as might have distracted her thoughts. But it was too
late now. Besides that, with the nearly extinct race of man, all our toils grew
near a conclusion, she was too weak; consumption, if so it might be called, or
rather the over active life within her, which, as with Adrian, spent the vital
oil in the early morning hours, deprived her limbs of strength. At night, when
she could leave me unperceived, she wandered through the house, or hung over
the couches of her children; and in the day time would sink into a perturbed
sleep, while her murmurs and starts betrayed the unquiet dreams that vexed her.
As this state of wretchedness became more confirmed, and, in spite of her
endeavours at concealment more apparent, I strove, though vainly, to awaken in
her courage and hope. I could not wonder at the vehemence of her care; her very
soul was tenderness; she trusted indeed that she should not outlive me if I
became the prey of the vast calamity, and this thought sometimes relieved her.
We had for many years trod the highway of life hand in hand, and still thus
linked, we might step within the shades of death; but her children, her lovely,
playful, animated children—beings sprung from her own dear
side—portions of her own being—depositories of our loves—even
if we died, it would be comfort to know that they ran man’s accustomed
course. But it would not be so; young and blooming as they were, they would
die, and from the hopes of maturity, from the proud name of attained manhood,
they were cut off for ever. Often with maternal affection she had figured their
merits and talents exerted on life’s wide stage. Alas for these latter
days! The world had grown old, and all its inmates partook of the decrepitude.
Why talk of infancy, manhood, and old age? We all stood equal sharers of the
last throes of time-worn nature. Arrived at the same point of the world’s
age—there was no difference in us; the name of parent and child had lost
their meaning; young boys and girls were level now with men. This was all true;
but it was not less agonizing to take the admonition home.


Where could we turn, and not find a desolation pregnant with the dire lesson of
example? The fields had been left uncultivated, weeds and gaudy flowers sprung
up,—or where a few wheat-fields shewed signs of the living hopes of the
husbandman, the work had been left halfway, the ploughman had died beside the
plough; the horses had deserted the furrow, and no seedsman had approached the
dead; the cattle unattended wandered over the fields and through the lanes; the
tame inhabitants of the poultry yard, baulked of their daily food, had become
wild—young lambs were dropt in flower-gardens, and the cow stalled in the
hall of pleasure. Sickly and few, the country people neither went out to sow
nor reap; but sauntered about the meadows, or lay under the hedges, when the
inclement sky did not drive them to take shelter under the nearest roof. Many
of those who remained, secluded themselves; some had laid up stores which
should prevent the necessity of leaving their homes;—some deserted wife
and child, and imagined that they secured their safety in utter solitude. Such
had been Ryland’s plan, and he was discovered dead and half-devoured by
insects, in a house many miles from any other, with piles of food laid up in
useless superfluity. Others made long journies to unite themselves to those
they loved, and arrived to find them dead.


London did not contain above a thousand inhabitants; and this number was
continually diminishing. Most of them were country people, come up for the sake
of change; the Londoners had sought the country. The busy eastern part of the
town was silent, or at most you saw only where, half from cupidity, half from
curiosity, the warehouses had been more ransacked than pillaged: bales of rich
India goods, shawls of price, jewels, and spices, unpacked, strewed the floors.
In some places the possessor had to the last kept watch on his store, and died
before the barred gates. The massy portals of the churches swung creaking on
their hinges; and some few lay dead on the pavement. The wretched female,
loveless victim of vulgar brutality, had wandered to the toilet of high-born
beauty, and, arraying herself in the garb of splendour, had died before the
mirror which reflected to herself alone her altered appearance. Women whose
delicate feet had seldom touched the earth in their luxury, had fled in fright
and horror from their homes, till, losing themselves in the squalid streets of
the metropolis, they had died on the threshold of poverty. The heart sickened
at the variety of misery presented; and, when I saw a specimen of this gloomy
change, my soul ached with the fear of what might befall my beloved Idris and
my babes. Were they, surviving Adrian and myself, to find themselves
protectorless in the world? As yet the mind alone had suffered—could I
for ever put off the time, when the delicate frame and shrinking nerves of my
child of prosperity, the nursling of rank and wealth, who was my companion,
should be invaded by famine, hardship, and disease? Better die at
once—better plunge a poinard in her bosom, still untouched by drear
adversity, and then again sheathe it in my own! But, no; in times of misery we
must fight against our destinies, and strive not to be overcome by them. I
would not yield, but to the last gasp resolutely defended my dear ones against
sorrow and pain; and if I were vanquished at last, it should not be
ingloriously. I stood in the gap, resisting the enemy—the impalpable,
invisible foe, who had so long besieged us—as yet he had made no breach:
it must be my care that he should not, secretly undermining, burst up within
the very threshold of the temple of love, at whose altar I daily sacrificed.
The hunger of Death was now stung more sharply by the diminution of his food:
or was it that before, the survivors being many, the dead were less eagerly
counted? Now each life was a gem, each human breathing form of far, O! far more
worth than subtlest imagery of sculptured stone; and the daily, nay, hourly
decrease visible in our numbers, visited the heart with sickening misery. This
summer extinguished our hopes, the vessel of society was wrecked, and the
shattered raft, which carried the few survivors over the sea of misery, was
riven and tempest tost. Man existed by twos and threes; man, the individual who
might sleep, and wake, and perform the animal functions; but man, in himself
weak, yet more powerful in congregated numbers than wind or ocean; man, the
queller of the elements, the lord of created nature, the peer of demi-gods,
existed no longer.


Farewell to the patriotic scene, to the love of liberty and well earned meed of
virtuous aspiration!—farewell to crowded senate, vocal with the councils
of the wise, whose laws were keener than the sword blade tempered at
Damascus!—farewell to kingly pomp and warlike pageantry; the crowns are
in the dust, and the wearers are in their graves!—farewell to the desire
of rule, and the hope of victory; to high vaulting ambition, to the appetite
for praise, and the craving for the suffrage of their fellows! The nations are
no longer! No senate sits in council for the dead; no scion of a time honoured
dynasty pants to rule over the inhabitants of a charnel house; the
general’s hand is cold, and the soldier has his untimely grave dug in his
native fields, unhonoured, though in youth. The market-place is empty, the
candidate for popular favour finds none whom he can represent. To chambers of
painted state farewell!—To midnight revelry, and the panting emulation of
beauty, to costly dress and birth-day shew, to title and the gilded coronet,
farewell!


Farewell to the giant powers of man,—to knowledge that could pilot the
deep-drawing bark through the opposing waters of shoreless ocean,—to
science that directed the silken balloon through the pathless air,—to the
power that could put a barrier to mighty waters, and set in motion wheels, and
beams, and vast machinery, that could divide rocks of granite or marble, and
make the mountains plain!


Farewell to the arts,—to eloquence, which is to the human mind as the
winds to the sea, stirring, and then allaying it;—farewell to poetry and
deep philosophy, for man’s imagination is cold, and his enquiring mind
can no longer expatiate on the wonders of life, for “there is no work,
nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou
goest!”—to the graceful building, which in its perfect proportion
transcended the rude forms of nature, the fretted gothic and massy saracenic
pile, to the stupendous arch and glorious dome, the fluted column with its
capital, Corinthian, Ionic, or Doric, the peristyle and fair entablature, whose
harmony of form is to the eye as musical concord to the ear!—farewell to
sculpture, where the pure marble mocks human flesh, and in the plastic
expression of the culled excellencies of the human shape, shines forth the
god!—farewell to painting, the high wrought sentiment and deep knowledge
of the artists’s mind in pictured canvas—to paradisaical scenes,
where trees are ever vernal, and the ambrosial air rests in perpetual
glow:—to the stamped form of tempest, and wildest uproar of universal
nature encaged in the narrow frame, O farewell! Farewell to music, and the
sound of song; to the marriage of instruments, where the concord of soft and
harsh unites in sweet harmony, and gives wings to the panting listeners,
whereby to climb heaven, and learn the hidden pleasures of the
eternals!—Farewell to the well-trod stage; a truer tragedy is enacted on
the world’s ample scene, that puts to shame mimic grief: to high-bred
comedy, and the low buffoon, farewell!—Man may laugh no more. Alas! to
enumerate the adornments of humanity, shews, by what we have lost, how
supremely great man was. It is all over now. He is solitary; like our first
parents expelled from Paradise, he looks back towards the scene he has quitted.
The high walls of the tomb, and the flaming sword of plague, lie between it and
him. Like to our first parents, the whole earth is before him, a wide desart.
Unsupported and weak, let him wander through fields where the unreaped corn
stands in barren plenty, through copses planted by his fathers, through towns
built for his use. Posterity is no more; fame, and ambition, and love, are
words void of meaning; even as the cattle that grazes in the field, do thou, O
deserted one, lie down at evening-tide, unknowing of the past, careless of the
future, for from such fond ignorance alone canst thou hope for ease!


Joy paints with its own colours every act and thought. The happy do not feel
poverty—for delight is as a gold-tissued robe, and crowns them with
priceless gems. Enjoyment plays the cook to their homely fare, and mingles
intoxication with their simple drink. Joy strews the hard couch with roses, and
makes labour ease.


Sorrow doubles the burthen to the bent-down back; plants thorns in the
unyielding pillow; mingles gall with water; adds saltness to their bitter
bread; cloathing them in rags, and strewing ashes on their bare heads. To our
irremediable distress every small and pelting inconvenience came with added
force; we had strung our frames to endure the Atlean weight thrown on us; we
sank beneath the added feather chance threw on us, “the grasshopper was a
burthen.” Many of the survivors had been bred in luxury—their
servants were gone, their powers of command vanished like unreal shadows: the
poor even suffered various privations; and the idea of another winter like the
last, brought affright to our minds. Was it not enough that we must die, but
toil must be added?—must we prepare our funeral repast with labour, and
with unseemly drudgery heap fuel on our deserted hearths —must we with
servile hands fabricate the garments, soon to be our shroud?


Not so! We are presently to die, let us then enjoy to its full relish the
remnant of our lives. Sordid care, avaunt! menial labours, and pains, slight in
themselves, but too gigantic for our exhausted strength, shall make no part of
our ephemeral existences. In the beginning of time, when, as now, man lived by
families, and not by tribes or nations, they were placed in a genial clime,
where earth fed them untilled, and the balmy air enwrapt their reposing limbs
with warmth more pleasant than beds of down. The south is the native place of
the human race; the land of fruits, more grateful to man than the hard-earned
Ceres of the north,—of trees, whose boughs are as a palace-roof, of
couches of roses, and of the thirst-appeasing grape. We need not there fear
cold and hunger.


Look at England! the grass shoots up high in the meadows; but they are dank and
cold, unfit bed for us. Corn we have none, and the crude fruits cannot support
us. We must seek firing in the bowels of the earth, or the unkind atmosphere
will fill us with rheums and aches. The labour of hundreds of thousands alone
could make this inclement nook fit habitation for one man. To the south then,
to the sun!—where nature is kind, where Jove has showered forth the
contents of Amalthea’s horn, and earth is garden.


England, late birth-place of excellence and school of the wise, thy children
are gone, thy glory faded! Thou, England, wert the triumph of man! Small favour
was shewn thee by thy Creator, thou Isle of the North; a ragged canvas
naturally, painted by man with alien colours; but the hues he gave are faded,
never more to be renewed. So we must leave thee, thou marvel of the world; we
must bid farewell to thy clouds, and cold, and scarcity for ever! Thy manly
hearts are still; thy tale of power and liberty at its close! Bereft of man, O
little isle! the ocean waves will buffet thee, and the raven flap his wings
over thee; thy soil will be birth-place of weeds, thy sky will canopy
barrenness. It was not for the rose of Persia thou wert famous, nor the banana
of the east; not for the spicy gales of India, nor the sugar groves of America;
not for thy vines nor thy double harvests, nor for thy vernal airs, nor
solstitial sun—but for thy children, their unwearied industry and lofty
aspiration. They are gone, and thou goest with them the oft trodden path that
leads to oblivion, —


Farewell, sad Isle, farewell, thy fatal glory
Is summed, cast up, and cancelled in this story.[20]


 [19]
Elton’s translation of Hesiod.


 [20]
Cleveland’s Poems.

</div></body></text></TEI>