<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="4">
CHAPTER III.

Happy, thrice happy, were the months, and weeks, and hours of that year.
Friendship, hand in hand with admiration, tenderness and respect, built a bower
of delight in my heart, late rough as an untrod wild in America, as the
homeless wind or herbless sea. Insatiate thirst for knowledge, and boundless
affection for Adrian, combined to keep both my heart and understanding
occupied, and I was consequently happy. What happiness is so true and
unclouded, as the overflowing and talkative delight of young people. In our
boat, upon my native lake, beside the streams and the pale bordering
poplars—in valley and over hill, my crook thrown aside, a nobler flock to
tend than silly sheep, even a flock of new-born ideas, I read or listened to
Adrian; and his discourse, whether it concerned his love or his theories for
the improvement of man, alike entranced me. Sometimes my lawless mood would
return, my love of peril, my resistance to authority; but this was in his
absence; under the mild sway of his dear eyes, I was obedient and good as a boy
of five years old, who does his mother’s bidding.


After a residence of about a year at Ulswater, Adrian visited London, and came
back full of plans for our benefit. You must begin life, he said: you are
seventeen, and longer delay would render the necessary apprenticeship more and
more irksome. He foresaw that his own life would be one of struggle, and I must
partake his labours with him. The better to fit me for this task, we must now
separate. He found my name a good passport to preferment, and he had procured
for me the situation of private secretary to the Ambassador at Vienna, where I
should enter on my career under the best auspices. In two years, I should
return to my country, with a name well known and a reputation already founded.


And Perdita?—Perdita was to become the pupil, friend and younger sister
of Evadne. With his usual thoughtfulness, he had provided for her independence
in this situation. How refuse the offers of this generous friend?—I did
not wish to refuse them; but in my heart of hearts, I made a vow to devote
life, knowledge, and power, all of which, in as much as they were of any value,
he had bestowed on me—all, all my capacities and hopes, to him alone I
would devote.


Thus I promised myself, as I journied towards my destination with roused and
ardent expectation: expectation of the fulfilment of all that in boyhood we
promise ourselves of power and enjoyment in maturity. Methought the time was
now arrived, when, childish occupations laid aside, I should enter into life.
Even in the Elysian fields, Virgil describes the souls of the happy as eager to
drink of the wave which was to restore them to this mortal coil. The young are
seldom in Elysium, for their desires, outstripping possibility, leave them as
poor as a moneyless debtor. We are told by the wisest philosophers of the
dangers of the world, the deceits of men, and the treason of our own hearts:
but not the less fearlessly does each put off his frail bark from the port,
spread the sail, and strain his oar, to attain the multitudinous streams of the
sea of life. How few in youth’s prime, moor their vessels on the
“golden sands,” and collect the painted shells that strew them. But
all at close of day, with riven planks and rent canvas make for shore, and are
either wrecked ere they reach it, or find some wave-beaten haven, some desart
strand, whereon to cast themselves and die unmourned.


A truce to philosophy!—Life is before me, and I rush into possession.
Hope, glory, love, and blameless ambition are my guides, and my soul knows no
dread. What has been, though sweet, is gone; the present is good only because
it is about to change, and the to come is all my own. Do I fear, that my heart
palpitates? high aspirations cause the flow of my blood; my eyes seem to
penetrate the cloudy midnight of time, and to discern within the depths of its
darkness, the fruition of all my soul desires.


Now pause!—During my journey I might dream, and with buoyant wings reach
the summit of life’s high edifice. Now that I am arrived at its base, my
pinions are furled, the mighty stairs are before me, and step by step I must
ascend the wondrous fane—


Speak!—What door is opened?


Behold me in a new capacity. A diplomatist: one among the pleasure-seeking
society of a gay city; a youth of promise; favourite of the Ambassador. All was
strange and admirable to the shepherd of Cumberland. With breathless amaze I
entered on the gay scene, whose actors were


—the lilies glorious as Solomon,
Who toil not, neither do they spin.


Soon, too soon, I entered the giddy whirl; forgetting my studious hours, and
the companionship of Adrian. Passionate desire of sympathy, and ardent pursuit
for a wished-for object still characterized me. The sight of beauty entranced
me, and attractive manners in man or woman won my entire confidence. I called
it rapture, when a smile made my heart beat; and I felt the life’s blood
tingle in my frame, when I approached the idol which for awhile I worshipped.
The mere flow of animal spirits was Paradise, and at night’s close I only
desired a renewal of the intoxicating delusion. The dazzling light of
ornamented rooms; lovely forms arrayed in splendid dresses; the motions of a
dance, the voluptuous tones of exquisite music, cradled my senses in one
delightful dream.


And is not this in its kind happiness? I appeal to moralists and sages. I ask
if in the calm of their measured reveries, if in the deep meditations which
fill their hours, they feel the extasy of a youthful tyro in the school of
pleasure? Can the calm beams of their heaven-seeking eyes equal the flashes of
mingling passion which blind his, or does the influence of cold philosophy
steep their soul in a joy equal to his, engaged


In this dear work of youthful revelry.


But in truth, neither the lonely meditations of the hermit, nor the tumultuous
raptures of the reveller, are capable of satisfying man’s heart. From the
one we gather unquiet speculation, from the other satiety. The mind flags
beneath the weight of thought, and droops in the heartless intercourse of those
whose sole aim is amusement. There is no fruition in their vacant kindness, and
sharp rocks lurk beneath the smiling ripples of these shallow waters.


Thus I felt, when disappointment, weariness, and solitude drove me back upon my
heart, to gather thence the joy of which it had become barren. My flagging
spirits asked for something to speak to the affections; and not finding it, I
drooped. Thus, notwithstanding the thoughtless delight that waited on its
commencement, the impression I have of my life at Vienna is melancholy. Goethe
has said, that in youth we cannot be happy unless we love. I did not love; but
I was devoured by a restless wish to be something to others. I became the
victim of ingratitude and cold coquetry—then I desponded, and imagined
that my discontent gave me a right to hate the world. I receded to solitude; I
had recourse to my books, and my desire again to enjoy the society of Adrian
became a burning thirst.


Emulation, that in its excess almost assumed the venomous properties of envy,
gave a sting to these feelings. At this period the name and exploits of one of
my countrymen filled the world with admiration. Relations of what he had done,
conjectures concerning his future actions, were the never-failing topics of the
hour. I was not angry on my own account, but I felt as if the praises which
this idol received were leaves torn from laurels destined for Adrian. But I
must enter into some account of this darling of fame—this favourite of
the wonder-loving world.


Lord Raymond was the sole remnant of a noble but impoverished family. From
early youth he had considered his pedigree with complacency, and bitterly
lamented his want of wealth. His first wish was aggrandisement; and the means
that led towards this end were secondary considerations. Haughty, yet trembling
to every demonstration of respect; ambitious, but too proud to shew his
ambition; willing to achieve honour, yet a votary of pleasure,— he
entered upon life. He was met on the threshold by some insult, real or
imaginary; some repulse, where he least expected it; some disappointment, hard
for his pride to bear. He writhed beneath an injury he was unable to revenge;
and he quitted England with a vow not to return, till the good time should
arrive, when she might feel the power of him she now despised.


He became an adventurer in the Greek wars. His reckless courage and
comprehensive genius brought him into notice. He became the darling hero of
this rising people. His foreign birth, and he refused to throw off his
allegiance to his native country, alone prevented him from filling the first
offices in the state. But, though others might rank higher in title and
ceremony, Lord Raymond held a station above and beyond all this. He led the
Greek armies to victory; their triumphs were all his own. When he appeared,
whole towns poured forth their population to meet him; new songs were adapted
to their national airs, whose themes were his glory, valour, and munificence. A
truce was concluded between the Greeks and Turks. At the same time, Lord
Raymond, by some unlooked-for chance, became the possessor of an immense
fortune in England, whither he returned, crowned with glory, to receive the
meed of honour and distinction before denied to his pretensions. His proud
heart rebelled against this change. In what was the despised Raymond not the
same? If the acquisition of power in the shape of wealth caused this
alteration, that power should they feel as an iron yoke. Power therefore was
the aim of all his endeavours; aggrandizement the mark at which he for ever
shot. In open ambition or close intrigue, his end was the same—to attain
the first station in his own country.


This account filled me with curiosity. The events that in succession followed
his return to England, gave me keener feelings. Among his other advantages,
Lord Raymond was supremely handsome; every one admired him; of women he was the
idol. He was courteous, honey-tongued—an adept in fascinating arts. What
could not this man achieve in the busy English world? Change succeeded to
change; the entire history did not reach me; for Adrian had ceased to write,
and Perdita was a laconic correspondent. The rumour went that Adrian had
become—how write the fatal word—mad: that Lord Raymond was the
favourite of the ex-queen, her daughter’s destined husband. Nay, more,
that this aspiring noble revived the claim of the house of Windsor to the
crown, and that, on the event of Adrian’s incurable disorder and his
marriage with the sister, the brow of the ambitious Raymond might be encircled
with the magic ring of regality.


Such a tale filled the trumpet of many voiced fame; such a tale rendered my
longer stay at Vienna, away from the friend of my youth, intolerable. Now I
must fulfil my vow; now range myself at his side, and be his ally and support
till death. Farewell to courtly pleasure; to politic intrigue; to the maze of
passion and folly! All hail, England! Native England, receive thy child! thou
art the scene of all my hopes, the mighty theatre on which is acted the only
drama that can, heart and soul, bear me along with it in its development. A
voice most irresistible, a power omnipotent, drew me thither. After an absence
of two years I landed on its shores, not daring to make any inquiries, fearful
of every remark. My first visit would be to my sister, who inhabited a little
cottage, a part of Adrian’s gift, on the borders of Windsor Forest. From
her I should learn the truth concerning our protector; I should hear why she
had withdrawn from the protection of the Princess Evadne, and be instructed as
to the influence which this overtopping and towering Raymond exercised over the
fortunes of my friend.


I had never before been in the neighbourhood of Windsor; the fertility and
beauty of the country around now struck me with admiration, which encreased as
I approached the antique wood. The ruins of majestic oaks which had grown,
flourished, and decayed during the progress of centuries, marked where the
limits of the forest once reached, while the shattered palings and neglected
underwood shewed that this part was deserted for the younger plantations, which
owed their birth to the beginning of the nineteenth century, and now stood in
the pride of maturity. Perdita’s humble dwelling was situated on the
skirts of the most ancient portion; before it was stretched Bishopgate Heath,
which towards the east appeared interminable, and was bounded to the west by
Chapel Wood and the grove of Virginia Water. Behind, the cottage was shadowed
by the venerable fathers of the forest, under which the deer came to graze, and
which for the most part hollow and decayed, formed fantastic groups that
contrasted with the regular beauty of the younger trees. These, the offspring
of a later period, stood erect and seemed ready to advance fearlessly into
coming time; while those out worn stragglers, blasted and broke, clung to each
other, their weak boughs sighing as the wind buffetted them—a
weather-beaten crew.


A light railing surrounded the garden of the cottage, which, low-roofed, seemed
to submit to the majesty of nature, and cower amidst the venerable remains of
forgotten time. Flowers, the children of the spring, adorned her garden and
casements; in the midst of lowliness there was an air of elegance which spoke
the graceful taste of the inmate. With a beating heart I entered the enclosure;
as I stood at the entrance, I heard her voice, melodious as it had ever been,
which before I saw her assured me of her welfare.


A moment more and Perdita appeared; she stood before me in the fresh bloom of
youthful womanhood, different from and yet the same as the mountain girl I had
left. Her eyes could not be deeper than they were in childhood, nor her
countenance more expressive; but the expression was changed and improved;
intelligence sat on her brow; when she smiled her face was embellished by the
softest sensibility, and her low, modulated voice seemed tuned by love. Her
person was formed in the most feminine proportions; she was not tall, but her
mountain life had given freedom to her motions, so that her light step scarce
made her foot-fall heard as she tript across the hall to meet me. When we had
parted, I had clasped her to my bosom with unrestrained warmth; we met again,
and new feelings were awakened; when each beheld the other, childhood passed,
as full grown actors on this changeful scene. The pause was but for a moment;
the flood of association and natural feeling which had been checked, again
rushed in full tide upon our hearts, and with tenderest emotion we were swiftly
locked in each other’s embrace.


This burst of passionate feeling over, with calmed thoughts we sat together,
talking of the past and present. I alluded to the coldness of her letters; but
the few minutes we had spent together sufficiently explained the origin of
this. New feelings had arisen within her, which she was unable to express in
writing to one whom she had only known in childhood; but we saw each other
again, and our intimacy was renewed as if nothing had intervened to check it. I
detailed the incidents of my sojourn abroad, and then questioned her as to the
changes that had taken place at home, the causes of Adrian’s absence, and
her secluded life.


The tears that suffused my sister’s eyes when I mentioned our friend, and
her heightened colour seemed to vouch for the truth of the reports that had
reached me. But their import was too terrible for me to give instant credit to
my suspicion. Was there indeed anarchy in the sublime universe of
Adrian’s thoughts, did madness scatter the well-appointed legions, and
was he no longer the lord of his own soul? Beloved friend, this ill world was
no clime for your gentle spirit; you delivered up its governance to false
humanity, which stript it of its leaves ere winter-time, and laid bare its
quivering life to the evil ministration of roughest winds. Have those gentle
eyes, those “channels of the soul” lost their meaning, or do they
only in their glare disclose the horrible tale of its aberrations? Does that
voice no longer “discourse excellent music?” Horrible, most
horrible! I veil my eyes in terror of the change, and gushing tears bear
witness to my sympathy for this unimaginable ruin.


In obedience to my request Perdita detailed the melancholy circumstances that
led to this event.


The frank and unsuspicious mind of Adrian, gifted as it was by every natural
grace, endowed with transcendant powers of intellect, unblemished by the shadow
of defect (unless his dreadless independence of thought was to be construed
into one), was devoted, even as a victim to sacrifice, to his love for Evadne.
He entrusted to her keeping the treasures of his soul, his aspirations after
excellence, and his plans for the improvement of mankind. As manhood dawned
upon him, his schemes and theories, far from being changed by personal and
prudential motives, acquired new strength from the powers he felt arise within
him; and his love for Evadne became deep-rooted, as he each day became more
certain that the path he pursued was full of difficulty, and that he must seek
his reward, not in the applause or gratitude of his fellow creatures, hardly in
the success of his plans, but in the approbation of his own heart, and in her
love and sympathy, which was to lighten every toil and recompence every
sacrifice.


In solitude, and through many wanderings afar from the haunts of men, he
matured his views for the reform of the English government, and the improvement
of the people. It would have been well if he had concealed his sentiments,
until he had come into possession of the power which would secure their
practical development. But he was impatient of the years that must intervene,
he was frank of heart and fearless. He gave not only a brief denial to his
mother’s schemes, but published his intention of using his influence to
diminish the power of the aristocracy, to effect a greater equalization of
wealth and privilege, and to introduce a perfect system of republican
government into England. At first his mother treated his theories as the wild
ravings of inexperience. But they were so systematically arranged, and his
arguments so well supported, that though still in appearance incredulous, she
began to fear him. She tried to reason with him, and finding him inflexible,
learned to hate him.


Strange to say, this feeling was infectious. His enthusiasm for good which did
not exist; his contempt for the sacredness of authority; his ardour and
imprudence were all at the antipodes of the usual routine of life; the worldly
feared him; the young and inexperienced did not understand the lofty severity
of his moral views, and disliked him as a being different from themselves.
Evadne entered but coldly into his systems. She thought he did well to assert
his own will, but she wished that will to have been more intelligible to the
multitude. She had none of the spirit of a martyr, and did not incline to share
the shame and defeat of a fallen patriot. She was aware of the purity of his
motives, the generosity of his disposition, his true and ardent attachment to
her; and she entertained a great affection for him. He repaid this spirit of
kindness with the fondest gratitude, and made her the treasure-house of all his
hopes.


At this time Lord Raymond returned from Greece. No two persons could be more
opposite than Adrian and he. With all the incongruities of his character,
Raymond was emphatically a man of the world. His passions were violent; as
these often obtained the mastery over him, he could not always square his
conduct to the obvious line of self-interest, but self-gratification at least
was the paramount object with him. He looked on the structure of society as but
a part of the machinery which supported the web on which his life was traced.
The earth was spread out as an highway for him; the heavens built up as a
canopy for him.


Adrian felt that he made a part of a great whole. He owned affinity not only
with mankind, but all nature was akin to him; the mountains and sky were his
friends; the winds of heaven and the offspring of earth his playmates; while he
the focus only of this mighty mirror, felt his life mingle with the universe of
existence. His soul was sympathy, and dedicated to the worship of beauty and
excellence. Adrian and Raymond now came into contact, and a spirit of aversion
rose between them. Adrian despised the narrow views of the politician, and
Raymond held in supreme contempt the benevolent visions of the philanthropist.


With the coming of Raymond was formed the storm that laid waste at one fell
blow the gardens of delight and sheltered paths which Adrian fancied that he
had secured to himself, as a refuge from defeat and contumely. Raymond, the
deliverer of Greece, the graceful soldier, who bore in his mien a tinge of all
that, peculiar to her native clime, Evadne cherished as most dear—
Raymond was loved by Evadne. Overpowered by her new sensations, she did not
pause to examine them, or to regulate her conduct by any sentiments except the
tyrannical one which suddenly usurped the empire of her heart. She yielded to
its influence, and the too natural consequence in a mind unattuned to soft
emotions was, that the attentions of Adrian became distasteful to her. She grew
capricious; her gentle conduct towards him was exchanged for asperity and
repulsive coldness. When she perceived the wild or pathetic appeal of his
expressive countenance, she would relent, and for a while resume her ancient
kindness. But these fluctuations shook to its depths the soul of the sensitive
youth; he no longer deemed the world subject to him, because he possessed
Evadne’s love; he felt in every nerve that the dire storms of the mental
universe were about to attack his fragile being, which quivered at the
expectation of its advent.


Perdita, who then resided with Evadne, saw the torture that Adrian endured. She
loved him as a kind elder brother; a relation to guide, protect, and instruct
her, without the too frequent tyranny of parental authority. She adored his
virtues, and with mixed contempt and indignation she saw Evadne pile drear
sorrow on his head, for the sake of one who hardly marked her. In his solitary
despair Adrian would often seek my sister, and in covered terms express his
misery, while fortitude and agony divided the throne of his mind. Soon, alas!
was one to conquer. Anger made no part of his emotion. With whom should he be
angry? Not with Raymond, who was unconscious of the misery he occasioned; not
with Evadne, for her his soul wept tears of blood—poor, mistaken girl,
slave not tyrant was she, and amidst his own anguish he grieved for her future
destiny. Once a writing of his fell into Perdita’s hands; it was blotted
with tears—well might any blot it with the like—


“Life”—it began thus—“is not the thing romance
writers describe it; going through the measures of a dance, and after various
evolutions arriving at a conclusion, when the dancers may sit down and repose.
While there is life there is action and change. We go on, each thought linked
to the one which was its parent, each act to a previous act. No joy or sorrow
dies barren of progeny, which for ever generated and generating, weaves the
chain that make our life:


Un dia llama à otro dia
y asi llama, y encadena
llanto à llanto, y pena à pena.


Truly disappointment is the guardian deity of human life; she sits at the
threshold of unborn time, and marshals the events as they come forth. Once my
heart sat lightly in my bosom; all the beauty of the world was doubly
beautiful, irradiated by the sun-light shed from my own soul. O wherefore are
love and ruin for ever joined in this our mortal dream? So that when we make
our hearts a lair for that gently seeming beast, its companion enters with it,
and pitilessly lays waste what might have been an home and a shelter.”


By degrees his health was shaken by his misery, and then his intellect yielded
to the same tyranny. His manners grew wild; he was sometimes ferocious,
sometimes absorbed in speechless melancholy. Suddenly Evadne quitted London for
Paris; he followed, and overtook her when the vessel was about to sail; none
knew what passed between them, but Perdita had never seen him since; he lived
in seclusion, no one knew where, attended by such persons as his mother
selected for that purpose.

</div></body></text></TEI>