<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="9">
CHAPTER VII.

Having seen our friend properly installed in his new office, we turned our eyes
towards Windsor. The nearness of this place to London was such, as to take away
the idea of painful separation, when we quitted Raymond and Perdita. We took
leave of them in the Protectoral Palace. It was pretty enough to see my sister
enter as it were into the spirit of the drama, and endeavour to fill her
station with becoming dignity. Her internal pride and humility of manner were
now more than ever at war. Her timidity was not artificial, but arose from that
fear of not being properly appreciated, that slight estimation of the neglect
of the world, which also characterized Raymond. But then Perdita thought more
constantly of others than he; and part of her bashfulness arose from a wish to
take from those around her a sense of inferiority; a feeling which never
crossed her mind. From the circumstances of her birth and education, Idris
would have been better fitted for the formulae of ceremony; but the very ease
which accompanied such actions with her, arising from habit, rendered them
tedious; while, with every drawback, Perdita evidently enjoyed her situation.
She was too full of new ideas to feel much pain when we departed; she took an
affectionate leave of us, and promised to visit us soon; but she did not regret
the circumstances that caused our separation. The spirits of Raymond were
unbounded; he did not know what to do with his new got power; his head was full
of plans; he had as yet decided on none— but he promised himself, his
friends, and the world, that the aera of his Protectorship should be signalized
by some act of surpassing glory. Thus, we talked of them, and moralized, as
with diminished numbers we returned to Windsor Castle. We felt extreme delight
at our escape from political turmoil, and sought our solitude with redoubled
zest. We did not want for occupation; but my eager disposition was now turned
to the field of intellectual exertion only; and hard study I found to be an
excellent medicine to allay a fever of spirit with which in indolence, I should
doubtless have been assailed. Perdita had permitted us to take Clara back with
us to Windsor; and she and my two lovely infants were perpetual sources of
interest and amusement.


The only circumstance that disturbed our peace, was the health of Adrian. It
evidently declined, without any symptom which could lead us to suspect his
disease, unless indeed his brightened eyes, animated look, and flustering
cheeks, made us dread consumption; but he was without pain or fear. He betook
himself to books with ardour, and reposed from study in the society he best
loved, that of his sister and myself. Sometimes he went up to London to visit
Raymond, and watch the progress of events. Clara often accompanied him in these
excursions; partly that she might see her parents, partly because Adrian
delighted in the prattle, and intelligent looks of this lovely child.


Meanwhile all went on well in London. The new elections were finished;
parliament met, and Raymond was occupied in a thousand beneficial schemes.
Canals, aqueducts, bridges, stately buildings, and various edifices for public
utility, were entered upon; he was continually surrounded by projectors and
projects, which were to render England one scene of fertility and magnificence;
the state of poverty was to be abolished; men were to be transported from place
to place almost with the same facility as the Princes Houssain, Ali, and Ahmed,
in the Arabian Nights. The physical state of man would soon not yield to the
beatitude of angels; disease was to be banished; labour lightened of its
heaviest burden. Nor did this seem extravagant. The arts of life, and the
discoveries of science had augmented in a ratio which left all calculation
behind; food sprung up, so to say, spontaneously—machines existed to
supply with facility every want of the population. An evil direction still
survived; and men were not happy, not because they could not, but because they
would not rouse themselves to vanquish self-raised obstacles. Raymond was to
inspire them with his beneficial will, and the mechanism of society, once
systematised according to faultless rules, would never again swerve into
disorder. For these hopes he abandoned his long-cherished ambition of being
enregistered in the annals of nations as a successful warrior; laying aside his
sword, peace and its enduring glories became his aim—the title he coveted
was that of the benefactor of his country.


Among other works of art in which he was engaged, he had projected the erection
of a national gallery for statues and pictures. He possessed many himself,
which he designed to present to the Republic; and, as the edifice was to be the
great ornament of his Protectorship, he was very fastidious in his choice of
the plan on which it would be built. Hundreds were brought to him and rejected.
He sent even to Italy and Greece for drawings; but, as the design was to be
characterized by originality as well as by perfect beauty, his endeavours were
for a time without avail. At length a drawing came, with an address where
communications might be sent, and no artist’s name affixed. The design
was new and elegant, but faulty; so faulty, that although drawn with the hand
and eye of taste, it was evidently the work of one who was not an architect.
Raymond contemplated it with delight; the more he gazed, the more pleased he
was; and yet the errors multiplied under inspection. He wrote to the address
given, desiring to see the draughtsman, that such alterations might be made, as
should be suggested in a consultation between him and the original conceiver.


A Greek came. A middle-aged man, with some intelligence of manner, but with so
common-place a physiognomy, that Raymond could scarcely believe that he was the
designer. He acknowledged that he was not an architect; but the idea of the
building had struck him, though he had sent it without the smallest hope of its
being accepted. He was a man of few words. Raymond questioned him; but his
reserved answers soon made him turn from the man to the drawing. He pointed out
the errors, and the alterations that he wished to be made; he offered the Greek
a pencil that he might correct the sketch on the spot; this was refused by his
visitor, who said that he perfectly understood, and would work at it at home.
At length Raymond suffered him to depart.


The next day he returned. The design had been re-drawn; but many defects still
remained, and several of the instructions given had been misunderstood.
“Come,” said Raymond, “I yielded to you yesterday, now comply
with my request—take the pencil.”


The Greek took it, but he handled it in no artist-like way; at length he said:
“I must confess to you, my Lord, that I did not make this drawing. It is
impossible for you to see the real designer; your instructions must pass
through me. Condescend therefore to have patience with my ignorance, and to
explain your wishes to me; in time I am certain that you will be
satisfied.”


Raymond questioned vainly; the mysterious Greek would say no more. Would an
architect be permitted to see the artist? This also was refused. Raymond
repeated his instructions, and the visitor retired. Our friend resolved however
not to be foiled in his wish. He suspected, that unaccustomed poverty was the
cause of the mystery, and that the artist was unwilling to be seen in the garb
and abode of want. Raymond was only the more excited by this consideration to
discover him; impelled by the interest he took in obscure talent, he therefore
ordered a person skilled in such matters, to follow the Greek the next time he
came, and observe the house in which he should enter. His emissary obeyed, and
brought the desired intelligence. He had traced the man to one of the most
penurious streets in the metropolis. Raymond did not wonder, that, thus
situated, the artist had shrunk from notice, but he did not for this alter his
resolve.


On the same evening, he went alone to the house named to him. Poverty, dirt,
and squalid misery characterized its appearance. Alas! thought Raymond, I have
much to do before England becomes a Paradise. He knocked; the door was opened
by a string from above—the broken, wretched staircase was immediately
before him, but no person appeared; he knocked again, vainly—and then,
impatient of further delay, he ascended the dark, creaking stairs. His main
wish, more particularly now that he witnessed the abject dwelling of the
artist, was to relieve one, possessed of talent, but depressed by want. He
pictured to himself a youth, whose eyes sparkled with genius, whose person was
attenuated by famine. He half feared to displease him; but he trusted that his
generous kindness would be administered so delicately, as not to excite
repulse. What human heart is shut to kindness? and though poverty, in its
excess, might render the sufferer unapt to submit to the supposed degradation
of a benefit, the zeal of the benefactor must at last relax him into
thankfulness. These thoughts encouraged Raymond, as he stood at the door of the
highest room of the house. After trying vainly to enter the other apartments,
he perceived just within the threshold of this one, a pair of small Turkish
slippers; the door was ajar, but all was silent within. It was probable that
the inmate was absent, but secure that he had found the right person, our
adventurous Protector was tempted to enter, to leave a purse on the table, and
silently depart. In pursuance of this idea, he pushed open the door
gently—but the room was inhabited.


Raymond had never visited the dwellings of want, and the scene that now
presented itself struck him to the heart. The floor was sunk in many places;
the walls ragged and bare—the ceiling weather-stained—a tattered
bed stood in the corner; there were but two chairs in the room, and a rough
broken table, on which was a light in a tin candlestick;—yet in the midst
of such drear and heart sickening poverty, there was an air of order and
cleanliness that surprised him. The thought was fleeting; for his attention was
instantly drawn towards the inhabitant of this wretched abode. It was a female.
She sat at the table; one small hand shaded her eyes from the candle; the other
held a pencil; her looks were fixed on a drawing before her, which Raymond
recognized as the design presented to him. Her whole appearance awakened his
deepest interest. Her dark hair was braided and twined in thick knots like the
head-dress of a Grecian statue; her garb was mean, but her attitude might have
been selected as a model of grace. Raymond had a confused remembrance that he
had seen such a form before; he walked across the room; she did not raise her
eyes, merely asking in Romaic, who is there? “A friend,” replied
Raymond in the same dialect. She looked up wondering, and he saw that it was
Evadne Zaimi. Evadne, once the idol of Adrian’s affections; and who, for
the sake of her present visitor, had disdained the noble youth, and then,
neglected by him she loved, with crushed hopes and a stinging sense of misery,
had returned to her native Greece. What revolution of fortune could have
brought her to England, and housed her thus?


Raymond recognized her; and his manner changed from polite beneficence to the
warmest protestations of kindness and sympathy. The sight of her, in her
present situation, passed like an arrow into his soul. He sat by her, he took
her hand, and said a thousand things which breathed the deepest spirit of
compassion and affection. Evadne did not answer; her large dark eyes were cast
down, at length a tear glimmered on the lashes. “Thus,” she cried,
“kindness can do, what no want, no misery ever effected; I weep.”
She shed indeed many tears; her head sunk unconsciously on the shoulder of
Raymond; he held her hand: he kissed her sunken tear-stained cheek. He told
her, that her sufferings were now over: no one possessed the art of consoling
like Raymond; he did not reason or declaim, but his look shone with sympathy;
he brought pleasant images before the sufferer; his caresses excited no
distrust, for they arose purely from the feeling which leads a mother to kiss
her wounded child; a desire to demonstrate in every possible way the truth of
his feelings, and the keenness of his wish to pour balm into the lacerated mind
of the unfortunate. As Evadne regained her composure, his manner became even
gay; he sported with the idea of her poverty. Something told him that it was
not its real evils that lay heavily at her heart, but the debasement and
disgrace attendant on it; as he talked, he divested it of these; sometimes
speaking of her fortitude with energetic praise; then, alluding to her past
state, he called her his Princess in disguise. He made her warm offers of
service; she was too much occupied by more engrossing thoughts, either to
accept or reject them; at length he left her, making a promise to repeat his
visit the next day. He returned home, full of mingled feelings, of pain excited
by Evadne’s wretchedness, and pleasure at the prospect of relieving it.
Some motive for which he did not account, even to himself, prevented him from
relating his adventure to Perdita.


The next day he threw such disguise over his person as a cloak afforded, and
revisited Evadne. As he went, he bought a basket of costly fruits, such as were
natives of her own country, and throwing over these various beautiful flowers,
bore it himself to the miserable garret of his friend. “Behold,”
cried he, as he entered, “what bird’s food I have brought for my
sparrow on the house-top.”


Evadne now related the tale of her misfortunes. Her father, though of high
rank, had in the end dissipated his fortune, and even destroyed his reputation
and influence through a course of dissolute indulgence. His health was impaired
beyond hope of cure; and it became his earnest wish, before he died, to
preserve his daughter from the poverty which would be the portion of her orphan
state. He therefore accepted for her, and persuaded her to accede to, a
proposal of marriage, from a wealthy Greek merchant settled at Constantinople.
She quitted her native Greece; her father died; by degrees she was cut off from
all the companions and ties of her youth.


The war, which about a year before the present time had broken out between
Greece and Turkey, brought about many reverses of fortune. Her husband became
bankrupt, and then in a tumult and threatened massacre on the part of the
Turks, they were obliged to fly at midnight, and reached in an open boat an
English vessel under sail, which brought them immediately to this island. The
few jewels they had saved, supported them awhile. The whole strength of
Evadne’s mind was exerted to support the failing spirits of her husband.
Loss of property, hopelessness as to his future prospects, the inoccupation to
which poverty condemned him, combined to reduce him to a state bordering on
insanity. Five months after their arrival in England, he committed suicide.


“You will ask me,” continued Evadne, “what I have done since;
why I have not applied for succour to the rich Greeks resident here; why I have
not returned to my native country? My answer to these questions must needs
appear to you unsatisfactory, yet they have sufficed to lead me on, day after
day, enduring every wretchedness, rather than by such means to seek relief.
Shall the daughter of the noble, though prodigal Zaimi, appear a beggar before
her compeers or inferiors—superiors she had none. Shall I bow my head
before them, and with servile gesture sell my nobility for life? Had I a child,
or any tie to bind me to existence, I might descend to this—but, as it
is—the world has been to me a harsh step-mother; fain would I leave the
abode she seems to grudge, and in the grave forget my pride, my struggles, my
despair. The time will soon come; grief and famine have already sapped the
foundations of my being; a very short time, and I shall have passed away;
unstained by the crime of self-destruction, unstung by the memory of
degradation, my spirit will throw aside the miserable coil, and find such
recompense as fortitude and resignation may deserve. This may seem madness to
you, yet you also have pride and resolution; do not then wonder that my pride
is tameless, my resolution unalterable.”


Having thus finished her tale, and given such an account as she deemed fit, of
the motives of her abstaining from all endeavour to obtain aid from her
countrymen, Evadne paused; yet she seemed to have more to say, to which she was
unable to give words. In the mean time Raymond was eloquent. His desire of
restoring his lovely friend to her rank in society, and to her lost prosperity,
animated him, and he poured forth with energy, all his wishes and intentions on
that subject. But he was checked; Evadne exacted a promise, that he should
conceal from all her friends her existence in England. “The relatives of
the Earl of Windsor,” said she haughtily, “doubtless think that I
injured him; perhaps the Earl himself would be the first to acquit me, but
probably I do not deserve acquittal. I acted then, as I ever must, from
impulse. This abode of penury may at least prove the disinterestedness of my
conduct. No matter: I do not wish to plead my cause before any of them, not
even before your Lordship, had you not first discovered me. The tenor of my
actions will prove that I had rather die, than be a mark for scorn—behold
the proud Evadne in her tatters! look on the beggar-princess! There is aspic
venom in the thought—promise me that my secret shall not be violated by
you.”


Raymond promised; but then a new discussion ensued. Evadne required another
engagement on his part, that he would not without her concurrence enter into
any project for her benefit, nor himself offer relief. “Do not degrade me
in my own eyes,” she said; “poverty has long been my nurse;
hard-visaged she is, but honest. If dishonour, or what I conceive to be
dishonour, come near me, I am lost.” Raymond adduced many arguments and
fervent persuasions to overcome her feeling, but she remained unconvinced; and,
agitated by the discussion, she wildly and passionately made a solemn vow, to
fly and hide herself where he never could discover her, where famine would soon
bring death to conclude her woes, if he persisted in his to her disgracing
offers. She could support herself, she said. And then she shewed him how, by
executing various designs and paintings, she earned a pittance for her support.
Raymond yielded for the present. He felt assured, after he had for awhile
humoured her self-will, that in the end friendship and reason would gain the
day.


But the feelings that actuated Evadne were rooted in the depths of her being,
and were such in their growth as he had no means of understanding. Evadne loved
Raymond. He was the hero of her imagination, the image carved by love in the
unchanged texture of her heart. Seven years ago, in her youthful prime, she had
become attached to him; he had served her country against the Turks; he had in
her own land acquired that military glory peculiarly dear to the Greeks, since
they were still obliged inch by inch to fight for their security. Yet when he
returned thence, and first appeared in public life in England, her love did not
purchase his, which then vacillated between Perdita and a crown. While he was
yet undecided, she had quitted England; the news of his marriage reached her,
and her hopes, poorly nurtured blossoms, withered and fell. The glory of life
was gone for her; the roseate halo of love, which had imbued every object with
its own colour, faded;—she was content to take life as it was, and to
make the best of leaden-coloured reality. She married; and, carrying her
restless energy of character with her into new scenes, she turned her thoughts
to ambition, and aimed at the title and power of Princess of Wallachia; while
her patriotic feelings were soothed by the idea of the good she might do her
country, when her husband should be chief of this principality. She lived to
find ambition, as unreal a delusion as love. Her intrigues with Russia for the
furtherance of her object, excited the jealousy of the Porte, and the animosity
of the Greek government. She was considered a traitor by both, the ruin of her
husband followed; they avoided death by a timely flight, and she fell from the
height of her desires to penury in England. Much of this tale she concealed
from Raymond; nor did she confess, that repulse and denial, as to a criminal
convicted of the worst of crimes, that of bringing the scythe of foreign
despotism to cut away the new springing liberties of her country, would have
followed her application to any among the Greeks.


She knew that she was the cause of her husband’s utter ruin; and she
strung herself to bear the consequences. The reproaches which agony extorted;
or worse, cureless, uncomplaining depression, when his mind was sunk in a
torpor, not the less painful because it was silent and moveless. She reproached
herself with the crime of his death; guilt and its punishments appeared to
surround her; in vain she endeavoured to allay remorse by the memory of her
real integrity; the rest of the world, and she among them, judged of her
actions, by their consequences. She prayed for her husband’s soul; she
conjured the Supreme to place on her head the crime of his
self-destruction—she vowed to live to expiate his fault.


In the midst of such wretchedness as must soon have destroyed her, one thought
only was matter of consolation. She lived in the same country, breathed the
same air as Raymond. His name as Protector was the burthen of every tongue; his
achievements, projects, and magnificence, the argument of every story. Nothing
is so precious to a woman’s heart as the glory and excellence of him she
loves; thus in every horror Evadne revelled in his fame and prosperity. While
her husband lived, this feeling was regarded by her as a crime, repressed,
repented of. When he died, the tide of love resumed its ancient flow, it
deluged her soul with its tumultuous waves, and she gave herself up a prey to
its uncontrollable power.


But never, O, never, should he see her in her degraded state. Never should he
behold her fallen, as she deemed, from her pride of beauty, the
poverty-stricken inhabitant of a garret, with a name which had become a
reproach, and a weight of guilt on her soul. But though impenetrably veiled
from him, his public office permitted her to become acquainted with all his
actions, his daily course of life, even his conversation. She allowed herself
one luxury, she saw the newspapers every day, and feasted on the praise and
actions of the Protector. Not that this indulgence was devoid of accompanying
grief. Perdita’s name was for ever joined with his; their conjugal
felicity was celebrated even by the authentic testimony of facts. They were
continually together, nor could the unfortunate Evadne read the monosyllable
that designated his name, without, at the same time, being presented with the
image of her who was the faithful companion of all his labours and pleasures.
They, their Excellencies, met her eyes in each line, mingling an
evil potion that poisoned her very blood.


It was in the newspaper that she saw the advertisement for the design for a
national gallery. Combining with taste her remembrance of the edifices which
she had seen in the east, and by an effort of genius enduing them with unity of
design, she executed the plan which had been sent to the Protector. She
triumphed in the idea of bestowing, unknown and forgotten as she was, a benefit
upon him she loved; and with enthusiastic pride looked forward to the
accomplishment of a work of hers, which, immortalized in stone, would go down
to posterity stamped with the name of Raymond. She awaited with eagerness the
return of her messenger from the palace; she listened insatiate to his account
of each word, each look of the Protector; she felt bliss in this communication
with her beloved, although he knew not to whom he addressed his instructions.
The drawing itself became ineffably dear to her. He had seen it, and praised
it; it was again retouched by her, each stroke of her pencil was as a chord of
thrilling music, and bore to her the idea of a temple raised to celebrate the
deepest and most unutterable emotions of her soul. These contemplations engaged
her, when the voice of Raymond first struck her ear, a voice, once heard, never
to be forgotten; she mastered her gush of feelings, and welcomed him with quiet
gentleness.


Pride and tenderness now struggled, and at length made a compromise together.
She would see Raymond, since destiny had led him to her, and her constancy and
devotion must merit his friendship. But her rights with regard to him, and her
cherished independence, should not be injured by the idea of interest, or the
intervention of the complicated feelings attendant on pecuniary obligation, and
the relative situations of the benefactor, and benefited. Her mind was of
uncommon strength; she could subdue her sensible wants to her mental wishes,
and suffer cold, hunger and misery, rather than concede to fortune a contested
point. Alas! that in human nature such a pitch of mental discipline, and
disdainful negligence of nature itself, should not have been allied to the
extreme of moral excellence! But the resolution that permitted her to resist
the pains of privation, sprung from the too great energy of her passions; and
the concentrated self-will of which this was a sign, was destined to destroy
even the very idol, to preserve whose respect she submitted to this detail of
wretchedness.


Their intercourse continued. By degrees Evadne related to her friend the whole
of her story, the stain her name had received in Greece, the weight of sin
which had accrued to her from the death of her husband. When Raymond offered to
clear her reputation, and demonstrate to the world her real patriotism, she
declared that it was only through her present sufferings that she hoped for any
relief to the stings of conscience; that, in her state of mind, diseased as he
might think it, the necessity of occupation was salutary medicine; she ended by
extorting a promise that for the space of one month he would refrain from the
discussion of her interests, engaging after that time to yield in part to his
wishes. She could not disguise to herself that any change would separate her
from him; now she saw him each day. His connection with Adrian and Perdita was
never mentioned; he was to her a meteor, a companionless star, which at its
appointed hour rose in her hemisphere, whose appearance brought felicity, and
which, although it set, was never eclipsed. He came each day to her abode of
penury, and his presence transformed it to a temple redolent with sweets,
radiant with heaven’s own light; he partook of her delirium. “They
built a wall between them and the world”—Without, a thousand
harpies raved, remorse and misery, expecting the destined moment for their
invasion. Within, was the peace as of innocence, reckless blindless, deluding
joy, hope, whose still anchor rested on placid but unconstant water.


Thus, while Raymond had been wrapt in visions of power and fame, while he
looked forward to entire dominion over the elements and the mind of man, the
territory of his own heart escaped his notice; and from that unthought of
source arose the mighty torrent that overwhelmed his will, and carried to the
oblivious sea, fame, hope, and happiness.

</div></body></text></TEI>