<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="16">
CHAPTER III.

The stars still shone brightly when I awoke, and Taurus high in the southern
heaven shewed that it was midnight. I awoke from disturbed dreams. Methought I
had been invited to Timon’s last feast; I came with keen appetite, the
covers were removed, the hot water sent up its unsatisfying steams, while I
fled before the anger of the host, who assumed the form of Raymond; while to my
diseased fancy, the vessels hurled by him after me, were surcharged with fetid
vapour, and my friend’s shape, altered by a thousand distortions,
expanded into a gigantic phantom, bearing on its brow the sign of pestilence.
The growing shadow rose and rose, filling, and then seeming to endeavour to
burst beyond, the adamantine vault that bent over, sustaining and enclosing the
world. The night-mare became torture; with a strong effort I threw off sleep,
and recalled reason to her wonted functions. My first thought was Perdita; to
her I must return; her I must support, drawing such food from despair as might
best sustain her wounded heart; recalling her from the wild excesses of grief,
by the austere laws of duty, and the soft tenderness of regret.


The position of the stars was my only guide. I turned from the awful ruin of
the Golden City, and, after great exertion, succeeded in extricating myself
from its enclosure. I met a company of soldiers outside the walls; I borrowed a
horse from one of them, and hastened to my sister. The appearance of the plain
was changed during this short interval; the encampment was broken up; the
relics of the disbanded army met in small companies here and there; each face
was clouded; every gesture spoke astonishment and dismay.


With an heavy heart I entered the palace, and stood fearful to advance, to
speak, to look. In the midst of the hall was Perdita; she sat on the marble
pavement, her head fallen on her bosom, her hair dishevelled, her fingers
twined busily one within the other; she was pale as marble, and every feature
was contracted by agony. She perceived me, and looked up enquiringly; her half
glance of hope was misery; the words died before I could articulate them; I
felt a ghastly smile wrinkle my lips. She understood my gesture; again her head
fell; again her fingers worked restlessly. At last I recovered speech, but my
voice terrified her; the hapless girl had understood my look, and for worlds
she would not that the tale of her heavy misery should have been shaped out and
confirmed by hard, irrevocable words. Nay, she seemed to wish to distract my
thoughts from the subject: she rose from the floor: “Hush!” she
said, whisperingly; “after much weeping, Clara sleeps; we must not
disturb her.” She seated herself then on the same ottoman where I had
left her in the morning resting on the beating heart of her Raymond; I dared
not approach her, but sat at a distant corner, watching her starting and
nervous gestures. At length, in an abrupt manner she asked, “Where is
he?”


“O, fear not,” she continued, “fear not that I should
entertain hope! Yet tell me, have you found him? To have him once more in my
arms, to see him, however changed, is all I desire. Though Constantinople be
heaped above him as a tomb, yet I must find him—then cover us with the
city’s weight, with a mountain piled above—I care not, so that one
grave hold Raymond and his Perdita.” Then weeping, she clung to me:
“Take me to him,” she cried, “unkind Lionel, why do you keep
me here? Of myself I cannot find him —but you know where he
lies—lead me thither.”


At first these agonizing plaints filled me with intolerable compassion. But
soon I endeavoured to extract patience for her from the ideas she suggested. I
related my adventures of the night, my endeavours to find our lost one, and my
disappointment. Turning her thoughts this way, I gave them an object which
rescued them from insanity. With apparent calmness she discussed with me the
probable spot where he might be found, and planned the means we should use for
that purpose. Then hearing of my fatigue and abstinence, she herself brought me
food. I seized the favourable moment, and endeavoured to awaken in her
something beyond the killing torpor of grief. As I spoke, my subject carried me
away; deep admiration; grief, the offspring of truest affection, the
overflowing of a heart bursting with sympathy for all that had been great and
sublime in the career of my friend, inspired me as I poured forth the praises
of Raymond.


“Alas, for us,” I cried, “who have lost this latest honour of
the world! Beloved Raymond! He is gone to the nations of the dead; he has
become one of those, who render the dark abode of the obscure grave illustrious
by dwelling there. He has journied on the road that leads to it, and joined the
mighty of soul who went before him. When the world was in its infancy death
must have been terrible, and man left his friends and kindred to dwell, a
solitary stranger, in an unknown country. But now, he who dies finds many
companions gone before to prepare for his reception. The great of past ages
people it, the exalted hero of our own days is counted among its inhabitants,
while life becomes doubly ‘the desart and the solitude.’


“What a noble creature was Raymond, the first among the men of our time.
By the grandeur of his conceptions, the graceful daring of his actions, by his
wit and beauty, he won and ruled the minds of all. Of one only fault he might
have been accused; but his death has cancelled that. I have heard him called
inconstant of purpose—when he deserted, for the sake of love, the hope of
sovereignty, and when he abdicated the protectorship of England, men blamed his
infirmity of purpose. Now his death has crowned his life, and to the end of
time it will be remembered, that he devoted himself, a willing victim, to the
glory of Greece. Such was his choice: he expected to die. He foresaw that he
should leave this cheerful earth, the lightsome sky, and thy love, Perdita; yet
he neither hesitated or turned back, going right onward to his mark of fame.
While the earth lasts, his actions will be recorded with praise. Grecian
maidens will in devotion strew flowers on his tomb, and make the air around it
resonant with patriotic hymns, in which his name will find high record.”


I saw the features of Perdita soften; the sternness of grief yielded to
tenderness—I continued:—“Thus to honour him, is the sacred
duty of his survivors. To make his name even as an holy spot of ground,
enclosing it from all hostile attacks by our praise, shedding on it the
blossoms of love and regret, guarding it from decay, and bequeathing it
untainted to posterity. Such is the duty of his friends. A dearer one belongs
to you, Perdita, mother of his child. Do you remember in her infancy, with what
transport you beheld Clara, recognizing in her the united being of yourself and
Raymond; joying to view in this living temple a manifestation of your eternal
loves. Even such is she still. You say that you have lost Raymond. O,
no!—yet he lives with you and in you there. From him she sprung, flesh of
his flesh, bone of his bone—and not, as heretofore, are you content to
trace in her downy cheek and delicate limbs, an affinity to Raymond, but in her
enthusiastic affections, in the sweet qualities of her mind, you may still find
him living, the good, the great, the beloved. Be it your care to foster this
similarity—be it your care to render her worthy of him, so that, when she
glory in her origin, she take not shame for what she is.”


I could perceive that, when I recalled my sister’s thoughts to her duties
in life, she did not listen with the same patience as before. She appeared to
suspect a plan of consolation on my part, from which she, cherishing her
new-born grief, revolted. “You talk of the future,” she said,
“while the present is all to me. Let me find the earthly dwelling of my
beloved; let us rescue that from common dust, so that in times to come men may
point to the sacred tomb, and name it his—then to other thoughts, and a
new course of life, or what else fate, in her cruel tyranny, may have marked
out for me.”


After a short repose I prepared to leave her, that I might endeavour to
accomplish her wish. In the mean time we were joined by Clara, whose pallid
cheek and scared look shewed the deep impression grief had made on her young
mind. She seemed to be full of something to which she could not give words;
but, seizing an opportunity afforded by Perdita’s absence, she preferred
to me an earnest prayer, that I would take her within view of the gate at which
her father had entered Constantinople. She promised to commit no extravagance,
to be docile, and immediately to return. I could not refuse; for Clara was not
an ordinary child; her sensibility and intelligence seemed already to have
endowed her with the rights of womanhood. With her therefore, before me on my
horse, attended only by the servant who was to re-conduct her, we rode to the
Top Kapou. We found a party of soldiers gathered round it. They were listening.
“They are human cries,” said one: “More like the howling of a
dog,” replied another; and again they bent to catch the sound of regular
distant moans, which issued from the precincts of the ruined city. “That,
Clara,” I said, “is the gate, that the street which yestermorn your
father rode up.” Whatever Clara’s intention had been in asking to
be brought hither, it was balked by the presence of the soldiers. With earnest
gaze she looked on the labyrinth of smoking piles which had been a city, and
then expressed her readiness to return home. At this moment a melancholy howl
struck on our ears; it was repeated; “Hark!” cried Clara, “he
is there; that is Florio, my father’s dog.” It seemed to me
impossible that she could recognise the sound, but she persisted in her
assertion till she gained credit with the crowd about. At least it would be a
benevolent action to rescue the sufferer, whether human or brute, from the
desolation of the town; so, sending Clara back to her home, I again entered
Constantinople. Encouraged by the impunity attendant on my former visit,
several soldiers who had made a part of Raymond’s body guard, who had
loved him, and sincerely mourned his loss, accompanied me.


It is impossible to conjecture the strange enchainment of events which restored
the lifeless form of my friend to our hands. In that part of the town where the
fire had most raged the night before, and which now lay quenched, black and
cold, the dying dog of Raymond crouched beside the mutilated form of its lord.
At such a time sorrow has no voice; affliction, tamed by its very vehemence,
is mute. The poor animal recognised me, licked my hand, crept close to its
lord, and died. He had been evidently thrown from his horse by some falling
ruin, which had crushed his head, and defaced his whole person. I bent over the
body, and took in my hand the edge of his cloak, less altered in appearance
than the human frame it clothed. I pressed it to my lips, while the rough
soldiers gathered around, mourning over this worthiest prey of death, as if
regret and endless lamentation could re-illumine the extinguished spark, or
call to its shattered prison-house of flesh the liberated spirit. Yesterday
those limbs were worth an universe; they then enshrined a transcendant power,
whose intents, words, and actions were worthy to be recorded in letters of
gold; now the superstition of affection alone could give value to the shattered
mechanism, which, incapable and clod-like, no more resembled Raymond, than the
fallen rain is like the former mansion of cloud in which it climbed the highest
skies, and gilded by the sun, attracted all eyes, and satiated the sense by its
excess of beauty.


Such as he had now become, such as was his terrene vesture, defaced and
spoiled, we wrapt it in our cloaks, and lifting the burthen in our arms, bore
it from this city of the dead. The question arose as to where we should deposit
him. In our road to the palace, we passed through the Greek cemetery; here on a
tablet of black marble I caused him to be laid; the cypresses waved high above,
their death-like gloom accorded with his state of nothingness. We cut branches
of the funereal trees and placed them over him, and on these again his sword. I
left a guard to protect this treasure of dust; and ordered perpetual torches to
be burned around.


When I returned to Perdita, I found that she had already been informed of the
success of my undertaking. He, her beloved, the sole and eternal object of her
passionate tenderness, was restored her. Such was the maniac language of her
enthusiasm. What though those limbs moved not, and those lips could no more
frame modulated accents of wisdom and love! What though like a weed flung from
the fruitless sea, he lay the prey of corruption— still that was the form
she had caressed, those the lips that meeting hers, had drank the spirit of
love from the commingling breath; that was the earthly mechanism of dissoluble
clay she had called her own. True, she looked forward to another life; true,
the burning spirit of love seemed to her unextinguishable throughout eternity.
Yet at this time, with human fondness, she clung to all that her human senses
permitted her to see and feel to be a part of Raymond.


Pale as marble, clear and beaming as that, she heard my tale, and enquired
concerning the spot where he had been deposited. Her features had lost the
distortion of grief; her eyes were brightened, her very person seemed dilated;
while the excessive whiteness and even transparency of her skin, and something
hollow in her voice, bore witness that not tranquillity, but excess of
excitement, occasioned the treacherous calm that settled on her countenance. I
asked her where he should be buried. She replied, “At Athens; even at the
Athens which he loved. Without the town, on the acclivity of Hymettus, there is
a rocky recess which he pointed out to me as the spot where he would wish to
repose.”


My own desire certainly was that he should not be removed from the spot where
he now lay. But her wish was of course to be complied with; and I entreated her
to prepare without delay for our departure.


Behold now the melancholy train cross the flats of Thrace, and wind through the
defiles, and over the mountains of Macedonia, coast the clear waves of the
Peneus, cross the Larissean plain, pass the straits of Thermopylae, and
ascending in succession Œrta and Parnassus, descend to the fertile plain of
Athens. Women bear with resignation these long drawn ills, but to a man’s
impatient spirit, the slow motion of our cavalcade, the melancholy repose we
took at noon, the perpetual presence of the pall, gorgeous though it was, that
wrapt the rifled casket which had contained Raymond, the monotonous recurrence
of day and night, unvaried by hope or change, all the circumstances of our
march were intolerable. Perdita, shut up in herself, spoke little. Her carriage
was closed; and, when we rested, she sat leaning her pale cheek on her white
cold hand, with eyes fixed on the ground, indulging thoughts which refused
communication or sympathy.


We descended from Parnassus, emerging from its many folds, and passed through
Livadia on our road to Attica. Perdita would not enter Athens; but reposing at
Marathon on the night of our arrival, conducted me on the following day, to the
spot selected by her as the treasure house of Raymond’s dear remains. It
was in a recess near the head of the ravine to the south of Hymettus. The
chasm, deep, black, and hoary, swept from the summit to the base; in the
fissures of the rock myrtle underwood grew and wild thyme, the food of many
nations of bees; enormous crags protruded into the cleft, some beetling over,
others rising perpendicularly from it. At the foot of this sublime chasm, a
fertile laughing valley reached from sea to sea, and beyond was spread the blue
Aegean, sprinkled with islands, the light waves glancing beneath the sun. Close
to the spot on which we stood, was a solitary rock, high and conical, which,
divided on every side from the mountain, seemed a nature-hewn pyramid; with
little labour this block was reduced to a perfect shape; the narrow cell was
scooped out beneath in which Raymond was placed, and a short inscription,
carved in the living stone, recorded the name of its tenant, the cause and aera
of his death.


Every thing was accomplished with speed under my directions. I agreed to leave
the finishing and guardianship of the tomb to the head of the religious
establishment at Athens, and by the end of October prepared for my return to
England. I mentioned this to Perdita. It was painful to appear to drag her from
the last scene that spoke of her lost one; but to linger here was vain, and my
very soul was sick with its yearning to rejoin my Idris and her babes. In
reply, my sister requested me to accompany her the following evening to the
tomb of Raymond. Some days had passed since I had visited the spot. The path to
it had been enlarged, and steps hewn in the rock led us less circuitously than
before, to the spot itself; the platform on which the pyramid stood was
enlarged, and looking towards the south, in a recess overshadowed by the
straggling branches of a wild fig-tree, I saw foundations dug, and props and
rafters fixed, evidently the commencement of a cottage; standing on its
unfinished threshold, the tomb was at our right-hand, the whole ravine, and
plain, and azure sea immediately before us; the dark rocks received a glow from
the descending sun, which glanced along the cultivated valley, and dyed in
purple and orange the placid waves; we sat on a rocky elevation, and I gazed
with rapture on the beauteous panorama of living and changeful colours, which
varied and enhanced the graces of earth and ocean.


“Did I not do right,” said Perdita, “in having my loved one
conveyed hither? Hereafter this will be the cynosure of Greece. In such a spot
death loses half its terrors, and even the inanimate dust appears to partake of
the spirit of beauty which hallows this region. Lionel, he sleeps there; that
is the grave of Raymond, he whom in my youth I first loved; whom my heart
accompanied in days of separation and anger; to whom I am now joined for ever.
Never—mark me—never will I leave this spot. Methinks his spirit
remains here as well as that dust, which, uncommunicable though it be, is more
precious in its nothingness than aught else widowed earth clasps to her
sorrowing bosom. The myrtle bushes, the thyme, the little cyclamen, which peep
from the fissures of the rock, all the produce of the place, bear affinity to
him; the light that invests the hills participates in his essence, and sky and
mountains, sea and valley, are imbued by the presence of his spirit. I will
live and die here!


“Go you to England, Lionel; return to sweet Idris and dearest Adrian;
return, and let my orphan girl be as a child of your own in your house. Look on
me as dead; and truly if death be a mere change of state, I am dead. This is
another world, from that which late I inhabited, from that which is now your
home. Here I hold communion only with the has been, and to come. Go you to
England, and leave me where alone I can consent to drag out the miserable days
which I must still live.”


A shower of tears terminated her sad harangue. I had expected some extravagant
proposition, and remained silent awhile, collecting my thoughts that I might
the better combat her fanciful scheme. “You cherish dreary thoughts, my
dear Perdita,” I said, “nor do I wonder that for a time your better
reason should be influenced by passionate grief and a disturbed imagination.
Even I am in love with this last home of Raymond’s; nevertheless we must
quit it.”


“I expected this,” cried Perdita; “I supposed that you would
treat me as a mad, foolish girl. But do not deceive yourself; this cottage is
built by my order; and here I shall remain, until the hour arrives when I may
share his happier dwelling.”


“My dearest girl!”


“And what is there so strange in my design? I might have deceived you; I
might have talked of remaining here only a few months; in your anxiety to reach
Windsor you would have left me, and without reproach or contention, I might
have pursued my plan. But I disdained the artifice; or rather in my
wretchedness it was my only consolation to pour out my heart to you, my
brother, my only friend. You will not dispute with me? You know how wilful your
poor, misery-stricken sister is. Take my girl with you; wean her from sights
and thoughts of sorrow; let infantine hilarity revisit her heart, and animate
her eyes; so could it never be, were she near me; it is far better for all of
you that you should never see me again. For myself, I will not voluntarily seek
death, that is, I will not, while I can command myself; and I can here. But
drag me from this country; and my power of self control vanishes, nor can I
answer for the violence my agony of grief may lead me to commit.”


“You clothe your meaning, Perdita,” I replied, “in powerful
words, yet that meaning is selfish and unworthy of you. You have often agreed
with me that there is but one solution to the intricate riddle of life; to
improve ourselves, and contribute to the happiness of others: and now, in the
very prime of life, you desert your principles, and shut yourself up in useless
solitude. Will you think of Raymond less at Windsor, the scene of your early
happiness? Will you commune less with his departed spirit, while you watch over
and cultivate the rare excellence of his child? You have been sadly visited;
nor do I wonder that a feeling akin to insanity should drive you to bitter and
unreasonable imaginings. But a home of love awaits you in your native England.
My tenderness and affection must soothe you; the society of Raymond’s
friends will be of more solace than these dreary speculations. We will all make
it our first care, our dearest task, to contribute to your happiness.”


Perdita shook her head; “If it could be so,” she replied, “I
were much in the wrong to disdain your offers. But it is not a matter of
choice; I can live here only. I am a part of this scene; each and all its
properties are a part of me. This is no sudden fancy; I live by it. The
knowledge that I am here, rises with me in the morning, and enables me to
endure the light; it is mingled with my food, which else were poison; it walks,
it sleeps with me, for ever it accompanies me. Here I may even cease to repine,
and may add my tardy consent to the decree which has taken him from me. He
would rather have died such a death, which will be recorded in history to
endless time, than have lived to old age unknown, unhonoured. Nor can I desire
better, than, having been the chosen and beloved of his heart, here, in
youth’s prime, before added years can tarnish the best feelings of my
nature, to watch his tomb, and speedily rejoin him in his blessed repose.


“So much, my dearest Lionel, I have said, wishing to persuade you that I
do right. If you are unconvinced, I can add nothing further by way of argument,
and I can only declare my fixed resolve. I stay here; force only can remove me.
Be it so; drag me away—I return; confine me, imprison me, still I escape,
and come here. Or would my brother rather devote the heart-broken Perdita to
the straw and chains of a maniac, than suffer her to rest in peace beneath the
shadow of His society, in this my own selected and beloved
recess?”—


All this appeared to me, I own, methodized madness. I imagined, that it was my
imperative duty to take her from scenes that thus forcibly reminded her of her
loss. Nor did I doubt, that in the tranquillity of our family circle at
Windsor, she would recover some degree of composure, and in the end, of
happiness. My affection for Clara also led me to oppose these fond dreams of
cherished grief; her sensibility had already been too much excited; her infant
heedlessness too soon exchanged for deep and anxious thought. The strange and
romantic scheme of her mother, might confirm and perpetuate the painful view of
life, which had intruded itself thus early on her contemplation.


On returning home, the captain of the steam packet with whom I had agreed to
sail, came to tell me, that accidental circumstances hastened his departure,
and that, if I went with him, I must come on board at five on the following
morning. I hastily gave my consent to this arrangement, and as hastily formed a
plan through which Perdita should be forced to become my companion. I believe
that most people in my situation would have acted in the same manner. Yet this
consideration does not, or rather did not in after time, diminish the
reproaches of my conscience. At the moment, I felt convinced that I was acting
for the best, and that all I did was right and even necessary.


I sat with Perdita and soothed her, by my seeming assent to her wild scheme.
She received my concurrence with pleasure, and a thousand times over thanked
her deceiving, deceitful brother. As night came on, her spirits, enlivened by
my unexpected concession, regained an almost forgotten vivacity. I pretended to
be alarmed by the feverish glow in her cheek; I entreated her to take a
composing draught; I poured out the medicine, which she took docilely from me.
I watched her as she drank it. Falsehood and artifice are in themselves so
hateful, that, though I still thought I did right, a feeling of shame and guilt
came painfully upon me. I left her, and soon heard that she slept soundly under
the influence of the opiate I had administered. She was carried thus
unconscious on board; the anchor weighed, and the wind being favourable, we
stood far out to sea; with all the canvas spread, and the power of the engine
to assist, we scudded swiftly and steadily through the chafed element.


It was late in the day before Perdita awoke, and a longer time elapsed before
recovering from the torpor occasioned by the laudanum, she perceived her change
of situation. She started wildly from her couch, and flew to the cabin window.
The blue and troubled sea sped past the vessel, and was spread shoreless
around: the sky was covered by a rack, which in its swift motion shewed how
speedily she was borne away. The creaking of the masts, the clang of the
wheels, the tramp above, all persuaded her that she was already far from the
shores of Greece.—“Where are we?” she cried, “where are
we going?”—


The attendant whom I had stationed to watch her, replied, “to
England.”—


“And my brother?”—


“Is on deck, Madam.”


“Unkind! unkind!” exclaimed the poor victim, as with a deep sigh
she looked on the waste of waters. Then without further remark, she threw
herself on her couch, and closing her eyes remained motionless; so that but for
the deep sighs that burst from her, it would have seemed that she slept.


As soon as I heard that she had spoken, I sent Clara to her, that the sight of
the lovely innocent might inspire gentle and affectionate thoughts. But neither
the presence of her child, nor a subsequent visit from me, could rouse my
sister. She looked on Clara with a countenance of woful meaning, but she did
not speak. When I appeared, she turned away, and in reply to my enquiries, only
said, “You know not what you have done!”—I trusted that this
sullenness betokened merely the struggle between disappointment and natural
affection, and that in a few days she would be reconciled to her fate.


When night came on, she begged that Clara might sleep in a separate cabin. Her
servant, however, remained with her. About midnight she spoke to the latter,
saying that she had had a bad dream, and bade her go to her daughter, and bring
word whether she rested quietly. The woman obeyed.


The breeze, that had flagged since sunset, now rose again. I was on deck,
enjoying our swift progress. The quiet was disturbed only by the rush of waters
as they divided before the steady keel, the murmur of the moveless and full
sails, the wind whistling in the shrouds, and the regular motion of the engine.
The sea was gently agitated, now shewing a white crest, and now resuming an
uniform hue; the clouds had disappeared; and dark ether clipt the broad ocean,
in which the constellations vainly sought their accustomed mirror. Our rate
could not have been less than eight knots.


Suddenly I heard a splash in the sea. The sailors on watch rushed to the side
of the vessel, with the cry—some one gone overboard. “It is not
from deck,” said the man at the helm, “something has been thrown
from the aft cabin.” A call for the boat to be lowered was echoed from
the deck. I rushed into my sister’s cabin; it was empty.


With sails abaft, the engine stopt, the vessel remained unwillingly stationary,
until, after an hour’s search, my poor Perdita was brought on board. But
no care could re-animate her, no medicine cause her dear eyes to open, and the
blood to flow again from her pulseless heart. One clenched hand contained a
slip of paper, on which was written, “To Athens.” To ensure her
removal thither, and prevent the irrecoverable loss of her body in the wide
sea, she had had the precaution to fasten a long shawl round her waist, and
again to the staunchions of the cabin window. She had drifted somewhat under
the keel of the vessel, and her being out of sight occasioned the delay in
finding her. And thus the ill-starred girl died a victim to my senseless
rashness. Thus, in early day, she left us for the company of the dead, and
preferred to share the rocky grave of Raymond, before the animated scene this
cheerful earth afforded, and the society of loving friends. Thus in her
twenty-ninth year she died; having enjoyed some few years of the happiness of
paradise, and sustaining a reverse to which her impatient spirit and
affectionate disposition were unable to submit. As I marked the placid
expression that had settled on her countenance in death, I felt, in spite of
the pangs of remorse, in spite of heart-rending regret, that it was better to
die so, than to drag on long, miserable years of repining and inconsolable
grief. Stress of weather drove us up the Adriatic Gulph; and, our vessel being
hardly fitted to weather a storm, we took refuge in the port of Ancona. Here I
met Georgio Palli, the vice-admiral of the Greek fleet, a former friend and
warm partizan of Raymond. I committed the remains of my lost Perdita to his
care, for the purpose of having them transported to Hymettus, and placed in the
cell her Raymond already occupied beneath the pyramid. This was all
accomplished even as I wished. She reposed beside her beloved, and the tomb
above was inscribed with the united names of Raymond and Perdita.


I then came to a resolution of pursuing our journey to England overland. My own
heart was racked by regrets and remorse. The apprehension, that Raymond had
departed for ever, that his name, blended eternally with the past, must be
erased from every anticipation of the future, had come slowly upon me. I had
always admired his talents; his noble aspirations; his grand conceptions of the
glory and majesty of his ambition: his utter want of mean passions; his
fortitude and daring. In Greece I had learnt to love him; his very waywardness,
and self-abandonment to the impulses of superstition, attached me to him
doubly; it might be weakness, but it was the antipodes of all that was
grovelling and selfish. To these pangs were added the loss of Perdita, lost
through my own accursed self-will and conceit. This dear one, my sole relation;
whose progress I had marked from tender childhood through the varied path of
life, and seen her throughout conspicuous for integrity, devotion, and true
affection; for all that constitutes the peculiar graces of the female
character, and beheld her at last the victim of too much loving, too constant
an attachment to the perishable and lost, she, in her pride of beauty and life,
had thrown aside the pleasant perception of the apparent world for the
unreality of the grave, and had left poor Clara quite an orphan. I concealed
from this beloved child that her mother’s death was voluntary, and tried
every means to awaken cheerfulness in her sorrow-stricken spirit.


One of my first acts for the recovery even of my own composure, was to bid
farewell to the sea. Its hateful splash renewed again and again to my sense the
death of my sister; its roar was a dirge; in every dark hull that was tossed on
its inconstant bosom, I imaged a bier, that would convey to death all who
trusted to its treacherous smiles. Farewell to the sea! Come, my Clara, sit
beside me in this aerial bark; quickly and gently it cleaves the azure serene,
and with soft undulation glides upon the current of the air; or, if storm shake
its fragile mechanism, the green earth is below; we can descend, and take
shelter on the stable continent. Here aloft, the companions of the swift-winged
birds, we skim through the unresisting element, fleetly and fearlessly. The
light boat heaves not, nor is opposed by death-bearing waves; the ether opens
before the prow, and the shadow of the globe that upholds it, shelters us from
the noon-day sun. Beneath are the plains of Italy, or the vast undulations of
the wave-like Apennines: fertility reposes in their many folds, and woods crown
the summits. The free and happy peasant, unshackled by the Austrian, bears the
double harvest to the garner; and the refined citizens rear without dread the
long blighted tree of knowledge in this garden of the world. We were lifted
above the Alpine peaks, and from their deep and brawling ravines entered the
plain of fair France, and after an airy journey of six days, we landed at
Dieppe, furled the feathered wings, and closed the silken globe of our little
pinnace. A heavy rain made this mode of travelling now incommodious; so we
embarked in a steam-packet, and after a short passage landed at Portsmouth.


A strange story was rife here. A few days before, a tempest-struck vessel had
appeared off the town: the hull was parched-looking and cracked, the sails
rent, and bent in a careless, unseamanlike manner, the shrouds tangled and
broken. She drifted towards the harbour, and was stranded on the sands at the
entrance. In the morning the custom-house officers, together with a crowd of
idlers, visited her. One only of the crew appeared to have arrived with her. He
had got to shore, and had walked a few paces towards the town, and then,
vanquished by malady and approaching death, had fallen on the inhospitable
beach. He was found stiff, his hands clenched, and pressed against his breast.
His skin, nearly black, his matted hair and bristly beard, were signs of a long
protracted misery. It was whispered that he had died of the plague. No one
ventured on board the vessel, and strange sights were averred to be seen at
night, walking the deck, and hanging on the masts and shrouds. She soon went to
pieces; I was shewn where she had been, and saw her disjoined timbers tossed on
the waves. The body of the man who had landed, had been buried deep in the
sands; and none could tell more, than that the vessel was American built, and
that several months before the Fortunatas had sailed from Philadelphia, of
which no tidings were afterwards received.

</div></body></text></TEI>