<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="10">
CHAPTER VIII.

In the mean time what did Perdita?


During the first months of his Protectorate, Raymond and she had been
inseparable; each project was discussed with her, each plan approved by her. I
never beheld any one so perfectly happy as my sweet sister. Her expressive eyes
were two stars whose beams were love; hope and light-heartedness sat on her
cloudless brow. She fed even to tears of joy on the praise and glory of her
Lord; her whole existence was one sacrifice to him, and if in the humility of
her heart she felt self-complacency, it arose from the reflection that she had
won the distinguished hero of the age, and had for years preserved him, even
after time had taken from love its usual nourishment. Her own feeling was as
entire as at its birth. Five years had failed to destroy the dazzling unreality
of passion. Most men ruthlessly destroy the sacred veil, with which the female
heart is wont to adorn the idol of its affections. Not so Raymond; he was an
enchanter, whose reign was for ever undiminished; a king whose power never was
suspended: follow him through the details of common life, still the same charm
of grace and majesty adorned him; nor could he be despoiled of the innate
deification with which nature had invested him. Perdita grew in beauty and
excellence under his eye; I no longer recognised my reserved abstracted sister
in the fascinating and open-hearted wife of Raymond. The genius that
enlightened her countenance, was now united to an expression of benevolence,
which gave divine perfection to her beauty.


Happiness is in its highest degree the sister of goodness. Suffering and
amiability may exist together, and writers have loved to depict their
conjunction; there is a human and touching harmony in the picture. But perfect
happiness is an attribute of angels; and those who possess it, appear angelic.
Fear has been said to be the parent of religion: even of that religion is it
the generator, which leads its votaries to sacrifice human victims at its
altars; but the religion which springs from happiness is a lovelier growth; the
religion which makes the heart breathe forth fervent thanksgiving, and causes
us to pour out the overflowings of the soul before the author of our being;
that which is the parent of the imagination and the nurse of poetry; that which
bestows benevolent intelligence on the visible mechanism of the world, and
makes earth a temple with heaven for its cope. Such happiness, goodness, and
religion inhabited the mind of Perdita.


During the five years we had spent together, a knot of happy human beings at
Windsor Castle, her blissful lot had been the frequent theme of my
sister’s conversation. From early habit, and natural affection, she
selected me in preference to Adrian or Idris, to be the partner in her
overflowings of delight; perhaps, though apparently much unlike, some secret
point of resemblance, the offspring of consanguinity, induced this preference.
Often at sunset, I have walked with her, in the sober, enshadowed forest paths,
and listened with joyful sympathy. Security gave dignity to her passion; the
certainty of a full return, left her with no wish unfulfilled. The birth of her
daughter, embryo copy of her Raymond, filled up the measure of her content, and
produced a sacred and indissoluble tie between them. Sometimes she felt proud
that he had preferred her to the hopes of a crown. Sometimes she remembered
that she had suffered keen anguish, when he hesitated in his choice. But this
memory of past discontent only served to enhance her present joy. What had been
hardly won, was now, entirely possessed, doubly dear. She would look at him at
a distance with the same rapture, (O, far more exuberant rapture!) that one
might feel, who after the perils of a tempest, should find himself in the
desired port; she would hasten towards him, to feel more certain in his arms,
the reality of her bliss. This warmth of affection, added to the depth of her
understanding, and the brilliancy of her imagination, made her beyond words
dear to Raymond.


If a feeling of dissatisfaction ever crossed her, it arose from the idea that
he was not perfectly happy. Desire of renown, and presumptuous ambition, had
characterized his youth. The one he had acquired in Greece; the other he had
sacrificed to love. His intellect found sufficient field for exercise in his
domestic circle, whose members, all adorned by refinement and literature, were
many of them, like himself, distinguished by genius. Yet active life was the
genuine soil for his virtues; and he sometimes suffered tedium from the
monotonous succession of events in our retirement. Pride made him recoil from
complaint; and gratitude and affection to Perdita, generally acted as an opiate
to all desire, save that of meriting her love. We all observed the visitation
of these feelings, and none regretted them so much as Perdita. Her life
consecrated to him, was a slight sacrifice to reward his choice, but was not
that sufficient—Did he need any gratification that she was unable to
bestow? This was the only cloud in the azure of her happiness.


His passage to power had been full of pain to both. He however attained his
wish; he filled the situation for which nature seemed to have moulded him. His
activity was fed in wholesome measure, without either exhaustion or satiety;
his taste and genius found worthy expression in each of the modes human beings
have invented to encage and manifest the spirit of beauty; the goodness of his
heart made him never weary of conducing to the well-being of his
fellow-creatures; his magnificent spirit, and aspirations for the respect and
love of mankind, now received fruition; true, his exaltation was temporary;
perhaps it were better that it should be so. Habit would not dull his sense of
the enjoyment of power; nor struggles, disappointment and defeat await the end
of that which would expire at its maturity. He determined to extract and
condense all of glory, power, and achievement, which might have resulted from a
long reign, into the three years of his Protectorate.


Raymond was eminently social. All that he now enjoyed would have been devoid of
pleasure to him, had it been unparticipated. But in Perdita he possessed all
that his heart could desire. Her love gave birth to sympathy; her intelligence
made her understand him at a word; her powers of intellect enabled her to
assist and guide him. He felt her worth. During the early years of their union,
the inequality of her temper, and yet unsubdued self-will which tarnished her
character, had been a slight drawback to the fulness of his sentiment. Now that
unchanged serenity, and gentle compliance were added to her other
qualifications, his respect equalled his love. Years added to the strictness of
their union. They did not now guess at, and totter on the pathway, divining the
mode to please, hoping, yet fearing the continuance of bliss. Five years gave a
sober certainty to their emotions, though it did not rob them of their etherial
nature. It had given them a child; but it had not detracted from the personal
attractions of my sister. Timidity, which in her had almost amounted to
awkwardness, was exchanged for a graceful decision of manner; frankness,
instead of reserve, characterized her physiognomy; and her voice was attuned to
thrilling softness. She was now three and twenty, in the pride of womanhood,
fulfilling the precious duties of wife and mother, possessed of all her heart
had ever coveted. Raymond was ten years older; to his previous beauty, noble
mien, and commanding aspect, he now added gentlest benevolence, winning
tenderness, graceful and unwearied attention to the wishes of another.


The first secret that had existed between them was the visits of Raymond to
Evadne. He had been struck by the fortitude and beauty of the ill-fated Greek;
and, when her constant tenderness towards him unfolded itself, he asked with
astonishment, by what act of his he had merited this passionate and unrequited
love. She was for a while the sole object of his reveries; and Perdita became
aware that his thoughts and time were bestowed on a subject unparticipated by
her. My sister was by nature destitute of the common feelings of anxious,
petulant jealousy. The treasure which she possessed in the affections of
Raymond, was more necessary to her being, than the life-blood that animated her
veins—more truly than Othello she might say,


    To be once in doubt,
Is—once to be resolved.


On the present occasion she did not suspect any alienation of affection; but
she conjectured that some circumstance connected with his high place, had
occasioned this mystery. She was startled and pained. She began to count the
long days, and months, and years which must elapse, before he would be restored
to a private station, and unreservedly to her. She was not content that, even
for a time, he should practice concealment with her. She often repined; but her
trust in the singleness of his affection was undisturbed; and, when they were
together, unchecked by fear, she opened her heart to the fullest delight.


Time went on. Raymond, stopping mid-way in his wild career, paused suddenly to
think of consequences. Two results presented themselves in the view he took of
the future. That his intercourse with Evadne should continue a secret to, or
that finally it should be discovered by Perdita. The destitute condition, and
highly wrought feelings of his friend prevented him from adverting to the
possibility of exiling himself from her. In the first event he had bidden an
eternal farewell to open-hearted converse, and entire sympathy with the
companion of his life. The veil must be thicker than that invented by Turkish
jealousy; the wall higher than the unscaleable tower of Vathek, which should
conceal from her the workings of his heart, and hide from her view the secret
of his actions. This idea was intolerably painful to him. Frankness and social
feelings were the essence of Raymond’s nature; without them his qualities
became common-place; without these to spread glory over his intercourse with
Perdita, his vaunted exchange of a throne for her love, was as weak and empty
as the rainbow hues which vanish when the sun is down. But there was no remedy.
Genius, devotion, and courage; the adornments of his mind, and the energies of
his soul, all exerted to their uttermost stretch, could not roll back one
hair’s breadth the wheel of time’s chariot; that which had been was
written with the adamantine pen of reality, on the everlasting volume of the
past; nor could agony and tears suffice to wash out one iota from the act
fulfilled.


But this was the best side of the question. What, if circumstance should lead
Perdita to suspect, and suspecting to be resolved? The fibres of his frame
became relaxed, and cold dew stood on his forehead, at this idea. Many men may
scoff at his dread; but he read the future; and the peace of Perdita was too
dear to him, her speechless agony too certain, and too fearful, not to unman
him. His course was speedily decided upon. If the worst befell; if she learnt
the truth, he would neither stand her reproaches, or the anguish of her altered
looks. He would forsake her, England, his friends, the scenes of his youth, the
hopes of coming time, he would seek another country, and in other scenes begin
life again. Having resolved on this, he became calmer. He endeavoured to guide
with prudence the steeds of destiny through the devious road which he had
chosen, and bent all his efforts the better to conceal what he could not alter.


The perfect confidence that subsisted between Perdita and him, rendered every
communication common between them. They opened each other’s letters, even
as, until now, the inmost fold of the heart of each was disclosed to the other.
A letter came unawares, Perdita read it. Had it contained confirmation, she
must have been annihilated. As it was, trembling, cold, and pale, she sought
Raymond. He was alone, examining some petitions lately presented. She entered
silently, sat on a sofa opposite to him, and gazed on him with a look of such
despair, that wildest shrieks and dire moans would have been tame exhibitions
of misery, compared to the living incarnation of the thing itself exhibited by
her.


At first he did not take his eyes from the papers; when he raised them, he was
struck by the wretchedness manifest on her altered cheek; for a moment he
forgot his own acts and fears, and asked with
consternation—“Dearest girl, what is the matter; what has
happened?”


“Nothing,” she replied at first; “and yet not so,” she
continued, hurrying on in her speech; “you have secrets, Raymond; where
have you been lately, whom have you seen, what do you conceal from
me?—why am I banished from your confidence? Yet this is not it—I do
not intend to entrap you with questions—one will suffice—am I
completely a wretch?”


With trembling hand she gave him the paper, and sat white and motionless
looking at him while he read it. He recognised the hand-writing of Evadne, and
the colour mounted in his cheeks. With lightning-speed he conceived the
contents of the letter; all was now cast on one die; falsehood and artifice
were trifles in comparison with the impending ruin. He would either entirely
dispel Perdita’s suspicions, or quit her for ever. “My dear
girl,” he said, “I have been to blame; but you must pardon me. I
was in the wrong to commence a system of concealment; but I did it for the sake
of sparing you pain; and each day has rendered it more difficult for me to
alter my plan. Besides, I was instigated by delicacy towards the unhappy writer
of these few lines.”


Perdita gasped: “Well,” she cried, “well, go on!”


“That is all—this paper tells all. I am placed in the most
difficult circumstances. I have done my best, though perhaps I have done wrong.
My love for you is inviolate.”


Perdita shook her head doubtingly: “It cannot be,” she cried,
“I know that it is not. You would deceive me, but I will not be deceived.
I have lost you, myself, my life!”


“Do you not believe me?” said Raymond haughtily.


“To believe you,” she exclaimed, “I would give up all, and
expire with joy, so that in death I could feel that you were true—but
that cannot be!”


“Perdita,” continued Raymond, “you do not see the precipice
on which you stand. You may believe that I did not enter on my present line of
conduct without reluctance and pain. I knew that it was possible that your
suspicions might be excited; but I trusted that my simple word would cause them
to disappear. I built my hope on your confidence. Do you think that I will be
questioned, and my replies disdainfully set aside? Do you think that I will be
suspected, perhaps watched, cross-questioned, and disbelieved? I am not yet
fallen so low; my honour is not yet so tarnished. You have loved me; I adored
you. But all human sentiments come to an end. Let our affection
expire—but let it not be exchanged for distrust and recrimination.
Heretofore we have been friends—lovers—let us not become enemies,
mutual spies. I cannot live the object of suspicion—you cannot believe
me—let us part!”


“Exactly so,” cried Perdita, “I knew that it would come to
this! Are we not already parted? Does not a stream, boundless as ocean, deep as
vacuum, yawn between us?”


Raymond rose, his voice was broken, his features convulsed, his manner calm as
the earthquake-cradling atmosphere, he replied: “I am rejoiced that you
take my decision so philosophically. Doubtless you will play the part of the
injured wife to admiration. Sometimes you may be stung with the feeling that
you have wronged me, but the condolence of your relatives, the pity of the
world, the complacency which the consciousness of your own immaculate innocence
will bestow, will be excellent balm;—me you will never see more!”


Raymond moved towards the door. He forgot that each word he spoke was false. He
personated his assumption of innocence even to self-deception. Have not actors
wept, as they pourtrayed imagined passion? A more intense feeling of the
reality of fiction possessed Raymond. He spoke with pride; he felt injured.
Perdita looked up; she saw his angry glance; his hand was on the lock of the
door. She started up, she threw herself on his neck, she gasped and sobbed; he
took her hand, and leading her to the sofa, sat down near her. Her head fell on
his shoulder, she trembled, alternate changes of fire and ice ran through her
limbs: observing her emotion he spoke with softened accents:


“The blow is given. I will not part from you in anger;—I owe you
too much. I owe you six years of unalloyed happiness. But they are passed. I
will not live the mark of suspicion, the object of jealousy. I love you too
well. In an eternal separation only can either of us hope for dignity and
propriety of action. We shall not then be degraded from our true characters.
Faith and devotion have hitherto been the essence of our
intercourse;—these lost, let us not cling to the seedless husk of life,
the unkernelled shell. You have your child, your brother, Idris,
Adrian”—


“And you,” cried Perdita, “the writer of that letter.”


Uncontrollable indignation flashed from the eyes of Raymond. He knew that this
accusation at least was false. “Entertain this belief,” he cried,
“hug it to your heart—make it a pillow to your head, an opiate for
your eyes —I am content. But, by the God that made me, hell is not more
false than the word you have spoken!”


Perdita was struck by the impassioned seriousness of his asseverations. She
replied with earnestness, “I do not refuse to believe you, Raymond; on
the contrary I promise to put implicit faith in your simple word. Only assure
me that your love and faith towards me have never been violated; and suspicion,
and doubt, and jealousy will at once be dispersed. We shall continue as we have
ever done, one heart, one hope, one life.”


“I have already assured you of my fidelity,” said Raymond with
disdainful coldness, “triple assertions will avail nothing where one is
despised. I will say no more; for I can add nothing to what I have already
said, to what you before contemptuously set aside. This contention is unworthy
of both of us; and I confess that I am weary of replying to charges at once
unfounded and unkind.”


Perdita tried to read his countenance, which he angrily averted. There was so
much of truth and nature in his resentment, that her doubts were dispelled. Her
countenance, which for years had not expressed a feeling unallied to affection,
became again radiant and satisfied. She found it however no easy task to soften
and reconcile Raymond. At first he refused to stay to hear her. But she would
not be put off; secure of his unaltered love, she was willing to undertake any
labour, use any entreaty, to dispel his anger. She obtained an hearing, he sat
in haughty silence, but he listened. She first assured him of her boundless
confidence; of this he must be conscious, since but for that she would not seek
to detain him. She enumerated their years of happiness; she brought before him
past scenes of intimacy and happiness; she pictured their future life, she
mentioned their child—tears unbidden now filled her eyes. She tried to
disperse them, but they refused to be checked—her utterance was choaked.
She had not wept before. Raymond could not resist these signs of distress: he
felt perhaps somewhat ashamed of the part he acted of the injured man, he who
was in truth the injurer. And then he devoutly loved Perdita; the bend of her
head, her glossy ringlets, the turn of her form were to him subjects of deep
tenderness and admiration; as she spoke, her melodious tones entered his soul;
he soon softened towards her, comforting and caressing her, and endeavouring to
cheat himself into the belief that he had never wronged her.


Raymond staggered forth from this scene, as a man might do, who had been just
put to the torture, and looked forward to when it would be again inflicted. He
had sinned against his own honour, by affirming, swearing to, a direct
falsehood; true this he had palmed on a woman, and it might therefore be deemed
less base—by others—not by him;—for whom had he
deceived?—his own trusting, devoted, affectionate Perdita, whose generous
belief galled him doubly, when he remembered the parade of innocence with which
it had been exacted. The mind of Raymond was not so rough cast, nor had been so
rudely handled, in the circumstance of life, as to make him proof to these
considerations—on the contrary, he was all nerve; his spirit was as a
pure fire, which fades and shrinks from every contagion of foul atmosphere: but
now the contagion had become incorporated with its essence, and the change was
the more painful. Truth and falsehood, love and hate lost their eternal
boundaries, heaven rushed in to mingle with hell; while his sensitive mind,
turned to a field for such battle, was stung to madness. He heartily despised
himself, he was angry with Perdita, and the idea of Evadne was attended by all
that was hideous and cruel. His passions, always his masters, acquired fresh
strength, from the long sleep in which love had cradled them, the clinging
weight of destiny bent him down; he was goaded, tortured, fiercely impatient of
that worst of miseries, the sense of remorse. This troubled state yielded by
degrees, to sullen animosity, and depression of spirits. His dependants, even
his equals, if in his present post he had any, were startled to find anger,
derision, and bitterness in one, before distinguished for suavity and
benevolence of manner. He transacted public business with distaste, and
hastened from it to the solitude which was at once his bane and relief. He
mounted a fiery horse, that which had borne him forward to victory in Greece;
he fatigued himself with deadening exercise, losing the pangs of a troubled
mind in animal sensation.


He slowly recovered himself; yet, at last, as one might from the effects of
poison, he lifted his head from above the vapours of fever and passion into the
still atmosphere of calm reflection. He meditated on what was best to be done.
He was first struck by the space of time that had elapsed, since madness,
rather than any reasonable impulse, had regulated his actions. A month had gone
by, and during that time he had not seen Evadne. Her power, which was linked to
few of the enduring emotions of his heart, had greatly decayed. He was no
longer her slave—no longer her lover: he would never see her more, and by
the completeness of his return, deserve the confidence of Perdita.


Yet, as he thus determined, fancy conjured up the miserable abode of the Greek
girl. An abode, which from noble and lofty principle, she had refused to
exchange for one of greater luxury. He thought of the splendour of her
situation and appearance when he first knew her; he thought of her life at
Constantinople, attended by every circumstance of oriental magnificence; of her
present penury, her daily task of industry, her lorn state, her faded,
famine-struck cheek. Compassion swelled his breast; he would see her once
again; he would devise some plan for restoring her to society, and the
enjoyment of her rank; their separation would then follow, as a matter of
course.


Again he thought, how during this long month, he had avoided Perdita, flying
from her as from the stings of his own conscience. But he was awake now; all
this should be remedied; and future devotion erase the memory of this only blot
on the serenity of their life. He became cheerful, as he thought of this, and
soberly and resolutely marked out the line of conduct he would adopt. He
remembered that he had promised Perdita to be present this very evening (the
19th of October, anniversary of his election as Protector) at a festival given
in his honour. Good augury should this festival be of the happiness of future
years. First, he would look in on Evadne; he would not stay; but he owed her
some account, some compensation for his long and unannounced absence; and then
to Perdita, to the forgotten world, to the duties of society, the splendour of
rank, the enjoyment of power.


After the scene sketched in the preceding pages, Perdita had contemplated an
entire change in the manners and conduct of Raymond. She expected freedom of
communication, and a return to those habits of affectionate intercourse which
had formed the delight of her life. But Raymond did not join her in any of her
avocations. He transacted the business of the day apart from her; he went out,
she knew not whither. The pain inflicted by this disappointment was tormenting
and keen. She looked on it as a deceitful dream, and tried to throw off the
consciousness of it; but like the shirt of Nessus, it clung to her very flesh,
and ate with sharp agony into her vital principle. She possessed that (though
such an assertion may appear a paradox) which belongs to few, a capacity of
happiness. Her delicate organization and creative imagination rendered her
peculiarly susceptible of pleasurable emotion. The overflowing warmth of her
heart, by making love a plant of deep root and stately growth, had attuned her
whole soul to the reception of happiness, when she found in Raymond all that
could adorn love and satisfy her imagination. But if the sentiment on which the
fabric of her existence was founded, became common place through participation,
the endless succession of attentions and graceful action snapt by transfer, his
universe of love wrested from her, happiness must depart, and then be exchanged
for its opposite. The same peculiarities of character rendered her sorrows
agonies; her fancy magnified them, her sensibility made her for ever open to
their renewed impression; love envenomed the heart-piercing sting. There was
neither submission, patience, nor self-abandonment in her grief; she fought
with it, struggled beneath it, and rendered every pang more sharp by
resistance. Again and again the idea recurred, that he loved another. She did
him justice; she believed that he felt a tender affection for her; but give a
paltry prize to him who in some life-pending lottery has calculated on the
possession of tens of thousands, and it will disappoint him more than a blank.
The affection and amity of a Raymond might be inestimable; but, beyond that
affection, embosomed deeper than friendship, was the indivisible treasure of
love. Take the sum in its completeness, and no arithmetic can calculate its
price; take from it the smallest portion, give it but the name of parts,
separate it into degrees and sections, and like the magician’s coin, the
valueless gold of the mine, is turned to vilest substance. There is a meaning
in the eye of love; a cadence in its voice, an irradiation in its smile, the
talisman of whose enchantments one only can possess; its spirit is elemental,
its essence single, its divinity an unit. The very heart and soul of Raymond
and Perdita had mingled, even as two mountain brooks that join in their
descent, and murmuring and sparkling flow over shining pebbles, beside starry
flowers; but let one desert its primal course, or be dammed up by choaking
obstruction, and the other shrinks in its altered banks. Perdita was sensible
of the failing of the tide that fed her life. Unable to support the slow
withering of her hopes, she suddenly formed a plan, resolving to terminate at
once the period of misery, and to bring to an happy conclusion the late
disastrous events.


The anniversary was at hand of the exaltation of Raymond to the office of
Protector; and it was customary to celebrate this day by a splendid festival. A
variety of feelings urged Perdita to shed double magnificence over the scene;
yet, as she arrayed herself for the evening gala, she wondered herself at the
pains she took, to render sumptuous the celebration of an event which appeared
to her the beginning of her sufferings. Woe befall the day, she thought, woe,
tears, and mourning betide the hour, that gave Raymond another hope than love,
another wish than my devotion; and thrice joyful the moment when he shall be
restored to me! God knows, I put my trust in his vows, and believe his asserted
faith—but for that, I would not seek what I am now resolved to attain.
Shall two years more be thus passed, each day adding to our alienation, each
act being another stone piled on the barrier which separates us? No, my
Raymond, my only beloved, sole possession of Perdita! This night, this splendid
assembly, these sumptuous apartments, and this adornment of your tearful girl,
are all united to celebrate your abdication. Once for me, you relinquished the
prospect of a crown. That was in days of early love, when I could only hold out
the hope, not the assurance of happiness. Now you have the experience of all
that I can give, the heart’s devotion, taintless love, and unhesitating
subjection to you. You must choose between these and your protectorate. This,
proud noble, is your last night! Perdita has bestowed on it all of magnificent
and dazzling that your heart best loves—but, from these gorgeous rooms,
from this princely attendance, from power and elevation, you must return with
to-morrow’s sun to our rural abode; for I would not buy an immortality of
joy, by the endurance of one more week sister to the last.


Brooding over this plan, resolved when the hour should come, to propose, and
insist upon its accomplishment, secure of his consent, the heart of Perdita was
lightened, or rather exalted. Her cheek was flushed by the expectation of
struggle; her eyes sparkled with the hope of triumph. Having cast her fate upon
a die, and feeling secure of winning, she, whom I have named as bearing the
stamp of queen of nations on her noble brow, now rose superior to humanity, and
seemed in calm power, to arrest with her finger, the wheel of destiny. She had
never before looked so supremely lovely.


We, the Arcadian shepherds of the tale, had intended to be present at this
festivity, but Perdita wrote to entreat us not to come, or to absent ourselves
from Windsor; for she (though she did not reveal her scheme to us) resolved the
next morning to return with Raymond to our dear circle, there to renew a course
of life in which she had found entire felicity. Late in the evening she entered
the apartments appropriated to the festival. Raymond had quitted the palace the
night before; he had promised to grace the assembly, but he had not yet
returned. Still she felt sure that he would come at last; and the wider the
breach might appear at this crisis, the more secure she was of closing it for
ever.


It was as I said, the nineteenth of October; the autumn was far advanced and
dreary. The wind howled; the half bare trees were despoiled of the remainder of
their summer ornament; the state of the air which induced the decay of
vegetation, was hostile to cheerfulness or hope. Raymond had been exalted by
the determination he had made; but with the declining day his spirits declined.
First he was to visit Evadne, and then to hasten to the palace of the
Protectorate. As he walked through the wretched streets in the neighbourhood of
the luckless Greek’s abode, his heart smote him for the whole course of
his conduct towards her. First, his having entered into any engagement that
should permit her to remain in such a state of degradation; and then, after a
short wild dream, having left her to drear solitude, anxious conjecture, and
bitter, still—disappointed expectation. What had she done the while, how
supported his absence and neglect? Light grew dim in these close streets, and
when the well known door was opened, the staircase was shrouded in perfect
night. He groped his way up, he entered the garret, he found Evadne stretched
speechless, almost lifeless on her wretched bed. He called for the people of
the house, but could learn nothing from them, except that they knew nothing.
Her story was plain to him, plain and distinct as the remorse and horror that
darted their fangs into him. When she found herself forsaken by him, she lost
the heart to pursue her usual avocations; pride forbade every application to
him; famine was welcomed as the kind porter to the gates of death, within whose
opening folds she should now, without sin, quickly repose. No creature came
near her, as her strength failed.


If she died, where could there be found on record a murderer, whose cruel act
might compare with his? What fiend more wanton in his mischief, what damned
soul more worthy of perdition! But he was not reserved for this agony of
self-reproach. He sent for medical assistance; the hours passed, spun by
suspense into ages; the darkness of the long autumnal night yielded to day,
before her life was secure. He had her then removed to a more commodious
dwelling, and hovered about her, again and again to assure himself that she was
safe.


In the midst of his greatest suspense and fear as to the event, he remembered
the festival given in his honour, by Perdita; in his honour then, when misery
and death were affixing indelible disgrace to his name, honour to him whose
crimes deserved a scaffold; this was the worst mockery. Still Perdita would
expect him; he wrote a few incoherent words on a scrap of paper, testifying
that he was well, and bade the woman of the house take it to the palace, and
deliver it into the hands of the wife of the Lord Protector. The woman, who did
not know him, contemptuously asked, how he thought she should gain admittance,
particularly on a festal night, to that lady’s presence? Raymond gave her
his ring to ensure the respect of the menials. Thus, while Perdita was
entertaining her guests, and anxiously awaiting the arrival of her lord, his
ring was brought her; and she was told that a poor woman had a note to deliver
to her from its wearer.


The vanity of the old gossip was raised by her commission, which, after all,
she did not understand, since she had no suspicion, even now that
Evadne’s visitor was Lord Raymond. Perdita dreaded a fall from his horse,
or some similar accident—till the woman’s answers woke other fears.
From a feeling of cunning blindly exercised, the officious, if not malignant
messenger, did not speak of Evadne’s illness; but she garrulously gave an
account of Raymond’s frequent visits, adding to her narration such
circumstances, as, while they convinced Perdita of its truth, exaggerated the
unkindness and perfidy of Raymond. Worst of all, his absence now from the
festival, his message wholly unaccounted for, except by the disgraceful hints
of the woman, appeared the deadliest insult. Again she looked at the ring, it
was a small ruby, almost heart-shaped, which she had herself given him. She
looked at the hand-writing, which she could not mistake, and repeated to
herself the words—“Do not, I charge you, I entreat you, permit your
guests to wonder at my absence:” the while the old crone going on with
her talk, filled her ear with a strange medley of truth and falsehood. At
length Perdita dismissed her.


The poor girl returned to the assembly, where her presence had not been missed.
She glided into a recess somewhat obscured, and leaning against an ornamental
column there placed, tried to recover herself. Her faculties were palsied. She
gazed on some flowers that stood near in a carved vase: that morning she had
arranged them, they were rare and lovely plants; even now all aghast as she
was, she observed their brilliant colours and starry
shapes.—“Divine infoliations of the spirit of beauty,” she
exclaimed, “Ye droop not, neither do ye mourn; the despair that clasps my
heart, has not spread contagion over you!—Why am I not a partner of your
insensibility, a sharer in your calm!”


She paused. “To my task,” she continued mentally, “my guests
must not perceive the reality, either as it regards him or me. I obey; they
shall not, though I die the moment they are gone. They shall behold the
antipodes of what is real—for I will appear to live—while I
am—dead.” It required all her self-command, to suppress the gush of
tears self-pity caused at this idea. After many struggles, she succeeded, and
turned to join the company.


All her efforts were now directed to the dissembling her internal conflict. She
had to play the part of a courteous hostess; to attend to all; to shine the
focus of enjoyment and grace. She had to do this, while in deep woe she sighed
for loneliness, and would gladly have exchanged her crowded rooms for dark
forest depths, or a drear, night-enshadowed heath. But she became gay. She
could not keep in the medium, nor be, as was usual with her, placidly content.
Every one remarked her exhilaration of spirits; as all actions appear graceful
in the eye of rank, her guests surrounded her applaudingly, although there was
a sharpness in her laugh, and an abruptness in her sallies, which might have
betrayed her secret to an attentive observer. She went on, feeling that, if she
had paused for a moment, the checked waters of misery would have deluged her
soul, that her wrecked hopes would raise their wailing voices, and that those
who now echoed her mirth, and provoked her repartees, would have shrunk in fear
from her convulsive despair. Her only consolation during the violence which she
did herself, was to watch the motions of an illuminated clock, and internally
count the moments which must elapse before she could be alone.


At length the rooms began to thin. Mocking her own desires, she rallied her
guests on their early departure. One by one they left her—at length she
pressed the hand of her last visitor. “How cold and damp your hand
is,” said her friend; “you are over fatigued, pray hasten to
rest.” Perdita smiled faintly—her guest left her; the carriage
rolling down the street assured the final departure. Then, as if pursued by an
enemy, as if wings had been at her feet, she flew to her own apartment, she
dismissed her attendants, she locked the doors, she threw herself wildly on the
floor, she bit her lips even to blood to suppress her shrieks, and lay long a
prey to the vulture of despair, striving not to think, while multitudinous
ideas made a home of her heart; and ideas, horrid as furies, cruel as vipers,
and poured in with such swift succession, that they seemed to jostle and wound
each other, while they worked her up to madness.


At length she rose, more composed, not less miserable. She stood before a large
mirror—she gazed on her reflected image; her light and graceful dress,
the jewels that studded her hair, and encircled her beauteous arms and neck,
her small feet shod in satin, her profuse and glossy tresses, all were to her
clouded brow and woe-begone countenance like a gorgeous frame to a dark
tempest-pourtraying picture. “Vase am I,” she thought, “vase
brimful of despair’s direst essence. Farewell, Perdita! farewell, poor
girl! never again will you see yourself thus; luxury and wealth are no longer
yours; in the excess of your poverty you may envy the homeless beggar; most
truly am I without a home! I live on a barren desart, which, wide and
interminable, brings forth neither fruit or flower; in the midst is a solitary
rock, to which thou, Perdita, art chained, and thou seest the dreary level
stretch far away.”


She threw open her window, which looked on the palace-garden. Light and
darkness were struggling together, and the orient was streaked by roseate and
golden rays. One star only trembled in the depth of the kindling atmosphere.
The morning air blowing freshly over the dewy plants, rushed into the heated
room. “All things go on,” thought Perdita, “all things
proceed, decay, and perish! When noontide has passed, and the weary day has
driven her team to their western stalls, the fires of heaven rise from the
East, moving in their accustomed path, they ascend and descend the skiey hill.
When their course is fulfilled, the dial begins to cast westward an uncertain
shadow; the eye-lids of day are opened, and birds and flowers, the startled
vegetation, and fresh breeze awaken; the sun at length appears, and in majestic
procession climbs the capitol of heaven. All proceeds, changes and dies, except
the sense of misery in my bursting heart.


“Ay, all proceeds and changes: what wonder then, that love has journied
on to its setting, and that the lord of my life has changed? We call the
supernal lights fixed, yet they wander about yonder plain, and if I look again
where I looked an hour ago, the face of the eternal heavens is altered. The
silly moon and inconstant planets vary nightly their erratic dance; the sun
itself, sovereign of the sky, ever and anon deserts his throne, and leaves his
dominion to night and winter. Nature grows old, and shakes in her decaying
limbs,—creation has become bankrupt! What wonder then, that eclipse and
death have led to destruction the light of thy life, O Perdita!”

</div></body></text></TEI>