<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="29">
CHAPTER VI.

Eventful winter passed; winter, the respite of our ills. By degrees the sun,
which with slant beams had before yielded the more extended reign to night,
lengthened his diurnal journey, and mounted his highest throne, at once the
fosterer of earth’s new beauty, and her lover. We who, like flies that
congregate upon a dry rock at the ebbing of the tide, had played wantonly with
time, allowing our passions, our hopes, and our mad desires to rule us, now
heard the approaching roar of the ocean of destruction, and would have fled to
some sheltered crevice, before the first wave broke over us. We resolved
without delay, to commence our journey to Switzerland; we became eager to leave
France. Under the icy vaults of the glaciers, beneath the shadow of the pines,
the swinging of whose mighty branches was arrested by a load of snow; beside
the streams whose intense cold proclaimed their origin to be from the
slow-melting piles of congelated waters, amidst frequent storms which might
purify the air, we should find health, if in truth health were not herself
diseased.


We began our preparations at first with alacrity. We did not now bid adieu to
our native country, to the graves of those we loved, to the flowers, and
streams, and trees, which had lived beside us from infancy. Small sorrow would
be ours on leaving Paris. A scene of shame, when we remembered our late
contentions, and thought that we left behind a flock of miserable, deluded
victims, bending under the tyranny of a selfish impostor. Small pangs should we
feel in leaving the gardens, woods, and halls of the palaces of the Bourbons at
Versailles, which we feared would soon be tainted by the dead, when we looked
forward to vallies lovelier than any garden, to mighty forests and halls, built
not for mortal majesty, but palaces of nature’s own, with the Alp of
marmoreal whiteness for their walls, the sky for their roof.


Yet our spirits flagged, as the day drew near which we had fixed for our
departure. Dire visions and evil auguries, if such things were, thickened
around us, so that in vain might men say—


These are their reasons, they are natural,[22]


we felt them to be ominous, and dreaded the future event enchained to them.
That the night owl should screech before the noon-day sun, that the hard-winged
bat should wheel around the bed of beauty, that muttering thunder should in
early spring startle the cloudless air, that sudden and exterminating blight
should fall on the tree and shrub, were unaccustomed, but physical events, less
horrible than the mental creations of almighty fear. Some had sight of funeral
processions, and faces all begrimed with tears, which flitted through the long
avenues of the gardens, and drew aside the curtains of the sleepers at dead of
night. Some heard wailing and cries in the air; a mournful chaunt would stream
through the dark atmosphere, as if spirits above sang the requiem of the human
race. What was there in all this, but that fear created other senses within our
frames, making us see, hear, and feel what was not? What was this, but the
action of diseased imaginations and childish credulity? So might it be; but
what was most real, was the existence of these very fears; the staring looks of
horror, the faces pale even to ghastliness, the voices struck dumb with
harrowing dread, of those among us who saw and heard these things. Of this
number was Adrian, who knew the delusion, yet could not cast off the clinging
terror. Even ignorant infancy appeared with timorous shrieks and convulsions to
acknowledge the presence of unseen powers. We must go: in change of scene, in
occupation, and such security as we still hoped to find, we should discover a
cure for these gathering horrors.


On mustering our company, we found them to consist of fourteen hundred souls,
men, women, and children. Until now therefore, we were undiminished in numbers,
except by the desertion of those who had attached themselves to the
impostor-prophet, and remained behind in Paris. About fifty French joined us.
Our order of march was easily arranged; the ill success which had attended our
division, determined Adrian to keep all in one body. I, with an hundred men,
went forward first as purveyor, taking the road of the Côte d’Or, through
Auxerre, Dijon, Dole, over the Jura to Geneva. I was to make arrangements, at
every ten miles, for the accommodation of such numbers as I found the town or
village would receive, leaving behind a messenger with a written order,
signifying how many were to be quartered there. The remainder of our tribe was
then divided into bands of fifty each, every division containing eighteen men,
and the remainder, consisting of women and children. Each of these was headed
by an officer, who carried the roll of names, by which they were each day to be
mustered. If the numbers were divided at night, in the morning those in the van
waited for those in the rear. At each of the large towns before mentioned, we
were all to assemble; and a conclave of the principal officers would hold
council for the general weal. I went first, as I said; Adrian last. His mother,
with Clara and Evelyn under her protection, remained also with him. Thus our
order being determined, I departed. My plan was to go at first no further than
Fontainebleau, where in a few days I should be joined by Adrian, before I took
flight again further eastward.


My friend accompanied me a few miles from Versailles. He was sad; and, in a
tone of unaccustomed despondency, uttered a prayer for our speedy arrival among
the Alps, accompanied with an expression of vain regret that we were not
already there. “In that case,” I observed, “we can quicken
our march; why adhere to a plan whose dilatory proceeding you already
disapprove?”


“Nay,” replied he, “it is too late now. A month ago, and we
were masters of ourselves; now,—” he turned his face from me;
though gathering twilight had already veiled its expression, he turned it yet
more away, as he added —“a man died of the plague last
night!”


He spoke in a smothered voice, then suddenly clasping his hands, he exclaimed,
“Swiftly, most swiftly advances the last hour for us all; as the stars
vanish before the sun, so will his near approach destroy us. I have done my
best; with grasping hands and impotent strength, I have hung on the wheel of
the chariot of plague; but she drags me along with it, while, like Juggernaut,
she proceeds crushing out the being of all who strew the high road of life.
Would that it were over—would that her procession achieved, we had all
entered the tomb together!”


Tears streamed from his eyes. “Again and again,” he continued,
“will the tragedy be acted; again I must hear the groans of the dying,
the wailing of the survivors; again witness the pangs, which, consummating all,
envelope an eternity in their evanescent existence. Why am I reserved for this?
Why the tainted wether of the flock, am I not struck to earth among the first?
It is hard, very hard, for one of woman born to endure all that I
endure!”


Hitherto, with an undaunted spirit, and an high feeling of duty and worth,
Adrian had fulfilled his self-imposed task. I had contemplated him with
reverence, and a fruitless desire of imitation. I now offered a few words of
encouragement and sympathy. He hid his face in his hands, and while he strove
to calm himself, he ejaculated, “For a few months, yet for a few months
more, let not, O God, my heart fail, or my courage be bowed down; let not
sights of intolerable misery madden this half-crazed brain, or cause this frail
heart to beat against its prison-bound, so that it burst. I have believed it to
be my destiny to guide and rule the last of the race of man, till death
extinguish my government; and to this destiny I submit.


“Pardon me, Verney, I pain you, but I will no longer complain. Now I am
myself again, or rather I am better than myself. You have known how from my
childhood aspiring thoughts and high desires have warred with inherent disease
and overstrained sensitiveness, till the latter became victors. You know how I
placed this wasted feeble hand on the abandoned helm of human government. I
have been visited at times by intervals of fluctuation; yet, until now, I have
felt as if a superior and indefatigable spirit had taken up its abode within me
or rather incorporated itself with my weaker being. The holy visitant has for a
time slept, perhaps to show me how powerless I am without its inspiration. Yet,
stay for a while, O Power of goodness and strength; disdain not yet this rent
shrine of fleshly mortality, O immortal Capability! While one fellow creature
remains to whom aid can be afforded, stay by and prop your shattered, falling
engine!”


His vehemence, and voice broken by irrepressible sighs, sunk to my heart; his
eyes gleamed in the gloom of night like two earthly stars; and, his form
dilating, his countenance beaming, truly it almost seemed as if at his eloquent
appeal a more than mortal spirit entered his frame, exalting him above
humanity. He turned quickly towards me, and held out his hand. “Farewell,
Verney,” he cried, “brother of my love, farewell; no other weak
expression must cross these lips, I am alive again: to our tasks, to our
combats with our unvanquishable foe, for to the last I will struggle against
her.”


He grasped my hand, and bent a look on me, more fervent and animated than any
smile; then turning his horse’s head, he touched the animal with the
spur, and was out of sight in a moment.


A man last night had died of the plague. The quiver was not emptied, nor the
bow unstrung. We stood as marks, while Parthian Pestilence aimed and shot,
insatiated by conquest, unobstructed by the heaps of slain. A sickness of the
soul, contagious even to my physical mechanism, came over me. My knees knocked
together, my teeth chattered, the current of my blood, clotted by sudden cold,
painfully forced its way from my heavy heart. I did not fear for myself, but it
was misery to think that we could not even save this remnant. That those I
loved might in a few days be as clay-cold as Idris in her antique tomb; nor
could strength of body or energy of mind ward off the blow. A sense of
degradation came over me. Did God create man, merely in the end to become dead
earth in the midst of healthful vegetating nature? Was he of no more account to
his Maker, than a field of corn blighted in the ear? Were our proud dreams thus
to fade? Our name was written “a little lower than the angels;”
and, behold, we were no better than ephemera. We had called ourselves the
“paragon of animals,” and, lo! we were a “quint-essence of
dust.” We repined that the pyramids had outlasted the embalmed body of
their builder. Alas! the mere shepherd’s hut of straw we passed on the
road, contained in its structure the principle of greater longevity than the
whole race of man. How reconcile this sad change to our past aspirations, to
our apparent powers!


Sudden an internal voice, articulate and clear, seemed to say:—Thus from
eternity, it was decreed: the steeds that bear Time onwards had this hour and
this fulfilment enchained to them, since the void brought forth its burthen.
Would you read backwards the unchangeable laws of Necessity?


Mother of the world! Servant of the Omnipotent! eternal, changeless Necessity!
who with busy fingers sittest ever weaving the indissoluble chain of
events!—I will not murmur at thy acts. If my human mind cannot
acknowledge that all that is, is right; yet since what is, must be, I will sit
amidst the ruins and smile. Truly we were not born to enjoy, but to submit, and
to hope.


Will not the reader tire, if I should minutely describe our long-drawn journey
from Paris to Geneva? If, day by day, I should record, in the form of a
journal, the thronging miseries of our lot, could my hand write, or language
afford words to express, the variety of our woe; the hustling and crowding of
one deplorable event upon another? Patience, oh reader! whoever thou art,
wherever thou dwellest, whether of race spiritual, or, sprung from some
surviving pair, thy nature will be human, thy habitation the earth; thou wilt
here read of the acts of the extinct race, and wilt ask wonderingly, if they,
who suffered what thou findest recorded, were of frail flesh and soft
organization like thyself. Most true, they were— weep therefore; for
surely, solitary being, thou wilt be of gentle disposition; shed compassionate
tears; but the while lend thy attention to the tale, and learn the deeds and
sufferings of thy predecessors.


Yet the last events that marked our progress through France were so full of
strange horror and gloomy misery, that I dare not pause too long in the
narration. If I were to dissect each incident, every small fragment of a second
would contain an harrowing tale, whose minutest word would curdle the blood in
thy young veins. It is right that I should erect for thy instruction this
monument of the foregone race; but not that I should drag thee through the
wards of an hospital, nor the secret chambers of the charnel-house. This tale,
therefore, shall be rapidly unfolded. Images of destruction, pictures of
despair, the procession of the last triumph of death, shall be drawn before
thee, swift as the rack driven by the north wind along the blotted splendour of
the sky.


Weed-grown fields, desolate towns, the wild approach of riderless horses had
now become habitual to my eyes; nay, sights far worse, of the unburied dead,
and human forms which were strewed on the road side, and on the steps of once
frequented habitations, where,


        Through the flesh that wastes away
Beneath the parching sun, the whitening bones
Start forth, and moulder in the sable dust.[23]


Sights like these had become—ah, woe the while! so familiar, that we had
ceased to shudder, or spur our stung horses to sudden speed, as we passed them.
France in its best days, at least that part of France through which we
travelled, had been a cultivated desert, and the absence of enclosures, of
cottages, and even of peasantry, was saddening to a traveller from sunny Italy,
or busy England. Yet the towns were frequent and lively, and the cordial
politeness and ready smile of the wooden-shoed peasant restored good humour to
the splenetic. Now, the old woman sat no more at the door with her
distaff—the lank beggar no longer asked charity in courtier-like phrase;
nor on holidays did the peasantry thread with slow grace the mazes of the
dance. Silence, melancholy bride of death, went in procession with him from
town to town through the spacious region.


We arrived at Fontainebleau, and speedily prepared for the reception of our
friends. On mustering our numbers for the night, three were found missing. When
I enquired for them, the man to whom I spoke, uttered the word
“plague,” and fell at my feet in convulsions; he also was infected.
There were hard faces around me; for among my troop were sailors who had
crossed the line times unnumbered, soldiers who, in Russia and far America, had
suffered famine, cold and danger, and men still sterner-featured, once nightly
depredators in our over-grown metropolis; men bred from their cradle to see the
whole machine of society at work for their destruction. I looked round, and saw
upon the faces of all horror and despair written in glaring characters.


We passed four days at Fontainebleau. Several sickened and died, and in the
mean time neither Adrian nor any of our friends appeared. My own troop was in
commotion; to reach Switzerland, to plunge into rivers of snow, and to dwell in
caves of ice, became the mad desire of all. Yet we had promised to wait for the
Earl; and he came not. My people demanded to be led forward— rebellion,
if so we might call what was the mere casting away of straw-formed shackles,
appeared manifestly among them. They would away on the word without a leader.
The only chance of safety, the only hope of preservation from every form of
indescribable suffering, was our keeping together. I told them this; while the
most determined among them answered with sullenness, that they could take care
of themselves, and replied to my entreaties with scoffs and menaces.


At length, on the fifth day, a messenger arrived from Adrian, bearing letters,
which directed us to proceed to Auxerre, and there await his arrival, which
would only be deferred for a few days. Such was the tenor of his public
letters. Those privately delivered to me, detailed at length the difficulties
of his situation, and left the arrangement of my future plans to my own
discretion. His account of the state of affairs at Versailles was brief, but
the oral communications of his messenger filled up his omissions, and shewed me
that perils of the most frightful nature were gathering around him. At first
the re-awakening of the plague had been concealed; but the number of deaths
encreasing, the secret was divulged, and the destruction already achieved, was
exaggerated by the fears of the survivors. Some emissaries of the enemy of
mankind, the accursed Impostors, were among them instilling their doctrine that
safety and life could only be ensured by submission to their chief; and they
succeeded so well, that soon, instead of desiring to proceed to Switzerland,
the major part of the multitude, weak-minded women, and dastardly men, desired
to return to Paris, and, by ranging themselves under the banners of the so
called prophet, and by a cowardly worship of the principle of evil, to purchase
respite, as they hoped, from impending death. The discord and tumult induced by
these conflicting fears and passions, detained Adrian. It required all his
ardour in pursuit of an object, and his patience under difficulties, to calm
and animate such a number of his followers, as might counterbalance the panic
of the rest, and lead them back to the means from which alone safety could be
derived. He had hoped immediately to follow me; but, being defeated in this
intention, he sent his messenger urging me to secure my own troop at such a
distance from Versailles, as to prevent the contagion of rebellion from
reaching them; promising, at the same time, to join me the moment a favourable
occasion should occur, by means of which he could withdraw the main body of the
emigrants from the evil influence at present exercised over them.


I was thrown into a most painful state of uncertainty by these communications.
My first impulse was that we should all return to Versailles, there to assist
in extricating our chief from his perils. I accordingly assembled my troop, and
proposed to them this retrograde movement, instead of the continuation of our
journey to Auxerre. With one voice they refused to comply. The notion
circulated among them was, that the ravages of the plague alone detained the
Protector; they opposed his order to my request; they came to a resolve to
proceed without me, should I refuse to accompany them. Argument and adjuration
were lost on these dastards. The continual diminution of their own numbers,
effected by pestilence, added a sting to their dislike of delay; and my
opposition only served to bring their resolution to a crisis. That same evening
they departed towards Auxerre. Oaths, as from soldiers to their general, had
been taken by them: these they broke. I also had engaged myself not to desert
them; it appeared to me inhuman to ground any infraction of my word on theirs.
The same spirit that caused them to rebel against me, would impel them to
desert each other; and the most dreadful sufferings would be the consequence of
their journey in their present unordered and chiefless array. These feelings
for a time were paramount; and, in obedience to them, I accompanied the rest
towards Auxerre. We arrived the same night at Villeneuve-la-Guiard, a town at
the distance of four posts from Fontainebleau. When my companions had retired
to rest, and I was left alone to revolve and ruminate upon the intelligence I
received of Adrian’s situation, another view of the subject presented
itself to me. What was I doing, and what was the object of my present
movements? Apparently I was to lead this troop of selfish and lawless men
towards Switzerland, leaving behind my family and my selected friend, which,
subject as they were hourly to the death that threatened to all, I might never
see again. Was it not my first duty to assist the Protector, setting an example
of attachment and duty? At a crisis, such as the one I had reached, it is very
difficult to balance nicely opposing interests, and that towards which our
inclinations lead us, obstinately assumes the appearance of selfishness, even
when we meditate a sacrifice. We are easily led at such times to make a
compromise of the question; and this was my present resource. I resolved that
very night to ride to Versailles; if I found affairs less desperate than I now
deemed them, I would return without delay to my troop; I had a vague idea that
my arrival at that town, would occasion some sensation more or less strong, of
which we might profit, for the purpose of leading forward the vacillating
multitude—at least no time was to be lost—I visited the stables, I
saddled my favourite horse, and vaulting on his back, without giving myself
time for further reflection or hesitation, quitted Villeneuve-la-Guiard on my
return to Versailles.


I was glad to escape from my rebellious troop, and to lose sight for a time, of
the strife of evil with good, where the former for ever remained triumphant. I
was stung almost to madness by my uncertainty concerning the fate of Adrian,
and grew reckless of any event, except what might lose or preserve my
unequalled friend. With an heavy heart, that sought relief in the rapidity of
my course, I rode through the night to Versailles. I spurred my horse, who
addressed his free limbs to speed, and tossed his gallant head in pride. The
constellations reeled swiftly by, swiftly each tree and stone and landmark fled
past my onward career. I bared my head to the rushing wind, which bathed my
brow in delightful coolness. As I lost sight of Villeneuve-la-Guiard, I forgot
the sad drama of human misery; methought it was happiness enough to live,
sensitive the while of the beauty of the verdure-clad earth, the
star-bespangled sky, and the tameless wind that lent animation to the whole. My
horse grew tired—and I, forgetful of his fatigue, still as he lagged,
cheered him with my voice, and urged him with the spur. He was a gallant
animal, and I did not wish to exchange him for any chance beast I might light
on, leaving him never to be refound. All night we went forward; in the morning
he became sensible that we approached Versailles, to reach which as his home,
he mustered his flagging strength. The distance we had come was not less than
fifty miles, yet he shot down the long Boulevards swift as an arrow; poor
fellow, as I dismounted at the gate of the castle, he sunk on his knees, his
eyes were covered with a film, he fell on his side, a few gasps inflated his
noble chest, and he died. I saw him expire with an anguish, unaccountable even
to myself, the spasm was as the wrenching of some limb in agonizing torture,
but it was brief as it was intolerable. I forgot him, as I swiftly darted
through the open portal, and up the majestic stairs of this castle of
victories—heard Adrian’s voice—O fool! O woman nurtured,
effeminate and contemptible being—I heard his voice, and answered it with
convulsive shrieks; I rushed into the Hall of Hercules, where he stood
surrounded by a crowd, whose eyes, turned in wonder on me, reminded me that on
the stage of the world, a man must repress such girlish extacies. I would have
given worlds to have embraced him; I dared not—Half in exhaustion, half
voluntarily, I threw myself at my length on the ground— dare I disclose
the truth to the gentle offspring of solitude? I did so, that I might kiss the
dear and sacred earth he trod.


I found everything in a state of tumult. An emissary of the leader of the
elect, had been so worked up by his chief, and by his own fanatical creed, as
to make an attempt on the life of the Protector and preserver of lost mankind.
His hand was arrested while in the act of poignarding the Earl; this
circumstance had caused the clamour I heard on my arrival at the castle, and
the confused assembly of persons that I found assembled in the Salle
d’Hercule. Although superstition and demoniac fury had crept among the
emigrants, yet several adhered with fidelity to their noble chieftain; and
many, whose faith and love had been unhinged by fear, felt all their latent
affection rekindled by this detestable attempt. A phalanx of faithful breasts
closed round him; the wretch, who, although a prisoner and in bonds, vaunted
his design, and madly claimed the crown of martyrdom, would have been torn to
pieces, had not his intended victim interposed. Adrian, springing forward,
shielded him with his own person, and commanded with energy the submission of
his infuriate friends—at this moment I had entered.


Discipline and peace were at length restored in the castle; and then Adrian
went from house to house, from troop to troop, to soothe the disturbed minds of
his followers, and recall them to their ancient obedience. But the fear of
immediate death was still rife amongst these survivors of a world’s
destruction; the horror occasioned by the attempted assassination, past away;
each eye turned towards Paris. Men love a prop so well, that they will lean on
a pointed poisoned spear; and such was he, the impostor, who, with fear of hell
for his scourge, most ravenous wolf, played the driver to a credulous flock.


It was a moment of suspense, that shook even the resolution of the unyielding
friend of man. Adrian for one moment was about to give in, to cease the
struggle, and quit, with a few adherents, the deluded crowd, leaving them a
miserable prey to their passions, and to the worse tyrant who excited them. But
again, after a brief fluctuation of purpose, he resumed his courage and
resolves, sustained by the singleness of his purpose, and the untried spirit of
benevolence which animated him. At this moment, as an omen of excellent import,
his wretched enemy pulled destruction on his head, destroying with his own
hands the dominion he had erected.


His grand hold upon the minds of men, took its rise from the doctrine
inculcated by him, that those who believed in, and followed him, were the
remnant to be saved, while all the rest of mankind were marked out for death.
Now, at the time of the Flood, the omnipotent repented him that he had created
man, and as then with water, now with the arrows of pestilence, was about to
annihilate all, except those who obeyed his decrees, promulgated by the ipse
dixit prophet. It is impossible to say on what foundations this man built
his hopes of being able to carry on such an imposture. It is likely that he was
fully aware of the lie which murderous nature might give to his assertions, and
believed it to be the cast of a die, whether he should in future ages be
reverenced as an inspired delegate from heaven, or be recognized as an impostor
by the present dying generation. At any rate he resolved to keep up the drama
to the last act. When, on the first approach of summer, the fatal disease again
made its ravages among the followers of Adrian, the impostor exultingly
proclaimed the exemption of his own congregation from the universal calamity.
He was believed; his followers, hitherto shut up in Paris, now came to
Versailles. Mingling with the coward band there assembled, they reviled their
admirable leader, and asserted their own superiority and exemption. At length
the plague, slow-footed, but sure in her noiseless advance, destroyed the
illusion, invading the congregation of the elect, and showering promiscuous
death among them. Their leader endeavoured to conceal this event; he had a few
followers, who, admitted into the arcana of his wickedness, could help him in
the execution of his nefarious designs. Those who sickened were immediately and
quietly withdrawn, the cord and a midnight-grave disposed of them for ever;
while some plausible excuse was given for their absence. At last a female,
whose maternal vigilance subdued even the effects of the narcotics administered
to her, became a witness of their murderous designs on her only child. Mad with
horror, she would have burst among her deluded fellow-victims, and, wildly
shrieking, have awaked the dull ear of night with the history of the fiend-like
crime; when the Impostor, in his last act of rage and desperation, plunged a
poignard in her bosom. Thus wounded to death, her garments dripping with her
own life-blood, bearing her strangled infant in her arms, beautiful and young
as she was, Juliet, (for it was she) denounced to the host of deceived
believers, the wickedness of their leader. He saw the aghast looks of her
auditors, changing from horror to fury—the names of those already
sacrificed were echoed by their relatives, now assured of their loss. The
wretch with that energy of purpose, which had borne him thus far in his guilty
career, saw his danger, and resolved to evade the worst forms of it—he
rushed on one of the foremost, seized a pistol from his girdle, and his loud
laugh of derision mingled with the report of the weapon with which he destroyed
himself.


They left his miserable remains even where they lay; they placed the corpse of
poor Juliet and her babe upon a bier, and all, with hearts subdued to saddest
regret, in long procession walked towards Versailles. They met troops of those
who had quitted the kindly protection of Adrian, and were journeying to join
the fanatics. The tale of horror was recounted—all turned back; and thus
at last, accompanied by the undiminished numbers of surviving humanity, and
preceded by the mournful emblem of their recovered reason, they appeared before
Adrian, and again and for ever vowed obedience to his commands, and fidelity to
his cause.


 [22]
Shakespeare—Julius Cæsar.


 [23]
Elton’s Translation of Hesiod’s “Shield of Hercules.”

</div></body></text></TEI>