<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="5">
CHAPTER IV.

The next day Lord Raymond called at Perdita’s cottage, on his way to
Windsor Castle. My sister’s heightened colour and sparkling eyes half
revealed her secret to me. He was perfectly self-possessed; he accosted us both
with courtesy, seemed immediately to enter into our feelings, and to make one
with us. I scanned his physiognomy, which varied as he spoke, yet was beautiful
in every change. The usual expression of his eyes was soft, though at times he
could make them even glare with ferocity; his complexion was colourless; and
every trait spoke predominate self-will; his smile was pleasing, though disdain
too often curled his lips—lips which to female eyes were the very throne
of beauty and love. His voice, usually gentle, often startled you by a sharp
discordant note, which shewed that his usual low tone was rather the work of
study than nature. Thus full of contradictions, unbending yet haughty, gentle
yet fierce, tender and again neglectful, he by some strange art found easy
entrance to the admiration and affection of women; now caressing and now
tyrannizing over them according to his mood, but in every change a despot.


At the present time Raymond evidently wished to appear amiable. Wit, hilarity,
and deep observation were mingled in his talk, rendering every sentence that he
uttered as a flash of light. He soon conquered my latent distaste; I
endeavoured to watch him and Perdita, and to keep in mind every thing I had
heard to his disadvantage. But all appeared so ingenuous, and all was so
fascinating, that I forgot everything except the pleasure his society afforded
me. Under the idea of initiating me in the scene of English politics and
society, of which I was soon to become a part, he narrated a number of
anecdotes, and sketched many characters; his discourse, rich and varied, flowed
on, pervading all my senses with pleasure. But for one thing he would have been
completely triumphant. He alluded to Adrian, and spoke of him with that
disparagement that the worldly wise always attach to enthusiasm. He perceived
the cloud gathering, and tried to dissipate it; but the strength of my feelings
would not permit me to pass thus lightly over this sacred subject; so I said
emphatically, “Permit me to remark, that I am devotedly attached to the
Earl of Windsor; he is my best friend and benefactor. I reverence his goodness,
I accord with his opinions, and bitterly lament his present, and I trust
temporary, illness. That illness, from its peculiarity, makes it painful to me
beyond words to hear him mentioned, unless in terms of respect and
affection.”


Raymond replied; but there was nothing conciliatory in his reply. I saw that in
his heart he despised those dedicated to any but worldly idols. “Every
man,” he said, “dreams about something, love, honour, and pleasure;
you dream of friendship, and devote yourself to a maniac; well, if that be your
vocation, doubtless you are in the right to follow it.”—


Some reflection seemed to sting him, and the spasm of pain that for a moment
convulsed his countenance, checked my indignation. “Happy are
dreamers,” he continued, “so that they be not awakened! Would I
could dream! but ‘broad and garish day’ is the element in which I
live; the dazzling glare of reality inverts the scene for me. Even the ghost of
friendship has departed, and love”——He broke off; nor could I
guess whether the disdain that curled his lip was directed against the passion,
or against himself for being its slave.


This account may be taken as a sample of my intercourse with Lord Raymond. I
became intimate with him, and each day afforded me occasion to admire more and
more his powerful and versatile talents, that together with his eloquence,
which was graceful and witty, and his wealth now immense, caused him to be
feared, loved, and hated beyond any other man in England.


My descent, which claimed interest, if not respect, my former connection with
Adrian, the favour of the ambassador, whose secretary I had been, and now my
intimacy with Lord Raymond, gave me easy access to the fashionable and
political circles of England. To my inexperience we at first appeared on the
eve of a civil war; each party was violent, acrimonious, and unyielding.
Parliament was divided by three factions, aristocrats, democrats, and
royalists. After Adrian’s declared predeliction to the republican form of
government, the latter party had nearly died away, chiefless, guideless; but,
when Lord Raymond came forward as its leader, it revived with redoubled force.
Some were royalists from prejudice and ancient affection, and there were many
moderately inclined who feared alike the capricious tyranny of the popular
party, and the unbending despotism of the aristocrats. More than a third of the
members ranged themselves under Raymond, and their number was perpetually
encreasing. The aristocrats built their hopes on their preponderant wealth and
influence; the reformers on the force of the nation itself; the debates were
violent, more violent the discourses held by each knot of politicians as they
assembled to arrange their measures. Opprobrious epithets were bandied about,
resistance even to the death threatened; meetings of the populace disturbed the
quiet order of the country; except in war, how could all this end? Even as the
destructive flames were ready to break forth, I saw them shrink back; allayed
by the absence of the military, by the aversion entertained by every one to any
violence, save that of speech, and by the cordial politeness and even
friendship of the hostile leaders when they met in private society. I was from
a thousand motives induced to attend minutely to the course of events, and
watch each turn with intense anxiety.


I could not but perceive that Perdita loved Raymond; methought also that he
regarded the fair daughter of Verney with admiration and tenderness. Yet I knew
that he was urging forward his marriage with the presumptive heiress of the
Earldom of Windsor, with keen expectation of the advantages that would thence
accrue to him. All the ex-queen’s friends were his friends; no week
passed that he did not hold consultations with her at Windsor.


I had never seen the sister of Adrian. I had heard that she was lovely,
amiable, and fascinating. Wherefore should I see her? There are times when we
have an indefinable sentiment of impending change for better or for worse, to
arise from an event; and, be it for better or for worse, we fear the change,
and shun the event. For this reason I avoided this high-born damsel. To me she
was everything and nothing; her very name mentioned by another made me start
and tremble; the endless discussion concerning her union with Lord Raymond was
real agony to me. Methought that, Adrian withdrawn from active life, and this
beauteous Idris, a victim probably to her mother’s ambitious schemes, I
ought to come forward to protect her from undue influence, guard her from
unhappiness, and secure to her freedom of choice, the right of every human
being. Yet how was I to do this? She herself would disdain my interference.
Since then I must be an object of indifference or contempt to her, better, far
better avoid her, nor expose myself before her and the scornful world to the
chance of playing the mad game of a fond, foolish Icarus. One day, several
months after my return to England, I quitted London to visit my sister. Her
society was my chief solace and delight; and my spirits always rose at the
expectation of seeing her. Her conversation was full of pointed remark and
discernment; in her pleasant alcove, redolent with sweetest flowers, adorned by
magnificent casts, antique vases, and copies of the finest pictures of Raphael,
Correggio, and Claude, painted by herself, I fancied myself in a fairy retreat
untainted by and inaccessible to the noisy contentions of politicians and the
frivolous pursuits of fashion. On this occasion, my sister was not alone; nor
could I fail to recognise her companion: it was Idris, the till now unseen
object of my mad idolatry.


In what fitting terms of wonder and delight, in what choice expression and soft
flow of language, can I usher in the loveliest, wisest, best? How in poor
assemblage of words convey the halo of glory that surrounded her, the thousand
graces that waited unwearied on her. The first thing that struck you on
beholding that charming countenance was its perfect goodness and frankness;
candour sat upon her brow, simplicity in her eyes, heavenly benignity in her
smile. Her tall slim figure bent gracefully as a poplar to the breezy west, and
her gait, goddess-like, was as that of a winged angel new alit from
heaven’s high floor; the pearly fairness of her complexion was stained by
a pure suffusion; her voice resembled the low, subdued tenor of a flute. It is
easiest perhaps to describe by contrast. I have detailed the perfections of my
sister; and yet she was utterly unlike Idris. Perdita, even where she loved,
was reserved and timid; Idris was frank and confiding. The one recoiled to
solitude, that she might there entrench herself from disappointment and injury;
the other walked forth in open day, believing that none would harm her.
Wordsworth has compared a beloved female to two fair objects in nature; but his
lines always appeared to me rather a contrast than a similitude:


A violet by a mossy stone
    Half hidden from the eye,
Fair as a star when only one
    Is shining in the sky.


Such a violet was sweet Perdita, trembling to entrust herself to the very air,
cowering from observation, yet betrayed by her excellences; and repaying with a
thousand graces the labour of those who sought her in her lonely bye-path.
Idris was as the star, set in single splendour in the dim anadem of balmy
evening; ready to enlighten and delight the subject world, shielded herself
from every taint by her unimagined distance from all that was not like herself
akin to heaven.


I found this vision of beauty in Perdita’s alcove, in earnest
conversation with its inmate. When my sister saw me, she rose, and taking my
hand, said, “He is here, even at our wish; this is Lionel, my
brother.” Idris arose also, and bent on me her eyes of celestial blue,
and with grace peculiar said—“You hardly need an introduction; we
have a picture, highly valued by my father, which declares at once your name.
Verney, you will acknowledge this tie, and as my brother’s friend, I feel
that I may trust you.”


Then, with lids humid with a tear and trembling voice, she continued—
“Dear friends, do not think it strange that now, visiting you for the
first time, I ask your assistance, and confide my wishes and fears to you. To
you alone do I dare speak; I have heard you commended by impartial spectators;
you are my brother’s friends, therefore you must be mine. What can I say?
if you refuse to aid me, I am lost indeed!” She cast up her eyes, while
wonder held her auditors mute; then, as if carried away by her feelings, she
cried—“My brother! beloved, ill-fated Adrian! how speak of your
misfortunes? Doubtless you have both heard the current tale; perhaps believe
the slander; but he is not mad! Were an angel from the foot of God’s
throne to assert it, never, never would I believe it. He is wronged, betrayed,
imprisoned—save him! Verney, you must do this; seek him out in whatever
part of the island he is immured; find him, rescue him from his persecutors,
restore him to himself, to me—on the wide earth I have none to love but
only him!”


Her earnest appeal, so sweetly and passionately expressed, filled me with
wonder and sympathy; and, when she added, with thrilling voice and look,
“Do you consent to undertake this enterprize?” I vowed, with energy
and truth, to devote myself in life and death to the restoration and welfare of
Adrian. We then conversed on the plan I should pursue, and discussed the
probable means of discovering his residence. While we were in earnest
discourse, Lord Raymond entered unannounced: I saw Perdita tremble and grow
deadly pale, and the cheeks of Idris glow with purest blushes. He must have
been astonished at our conclave, disturbed by it I should have thought; but
nothing of this appeared; he saluted my companions, and addressed me with a
cordial greeting. Idris appeared suspended for a moment, and then with extreme
sweetness, she said, “Lord Raymond, I confide in your goodness and
honour.”


Smiling haughtily, he bent his head, and replied, with emphasis, “Do you
indeed confide, Lady Idris?”


She endeavoured to read his thought, and then answered with dignity, “As
you please. It is certainly best not to compromise oneself by any
concealment.”


“Pardon me,” he replied, “if I have offended. Whether you
trust me or not, rely on my doing my utmost to further your wishes, whatever
they may be.”


Idris smiled her thanks, and rose to take leave. Lord Raymond requested
permission to accompany her to Windsor Castle, to which she consented, and they
quitted the cottage together. My sister and I were left—truly like two
fools, who fancied that they had obtained a golden treasure, till daylight
shewed it to be lead—two silly, luckless flies, who had played in
sunbeams and were caught in a spider’s web. I leaned against the
casement, and watched those two glorious creatures, till they disappeared in
the forest-glades; and then I turned. Perdita had not moved; her eyes fixed on
the ground, her cheeks pale, her very lips white, motionless and rigid, every
feature stamped by woe, she sat. Half frightened, I would have taken her hand;
but she shudderingly withdrew it, and strove to collect herself. I entreated
her to speak to me: “Not now,” she replied, “nor do you speak
to me, my dear Lionel; you can say nothing, for you know nothing. I will
see you to-morrow; in the meantime, adieu!” She rose, and walked from the
room; but pausing at the door, and leaning against it, as if her over-busy
thoughts had taken from her the power of supporting herself, she said,
“Lord Raymond will probably return. Will you tell him that he must excuse
me to-day, for I am not well. I will see him to-morrow if he wishes it, and you
also. You had better return to London with him; you can there make the
enquiries agreed upon, concerning the Earl of Windsor and visit me again
to-morrow, before you proceed on your journey—till then, farewell!”


She spoke falteringly, and concluded with a heavy sigh. I gave my assent to her
request; and she left me. I felt as if, from the order of the systematic world,
I had plunged into chaos, obscure, contrary, unintelligible. That Raymond
should marry Idris was more than ever intolerable; yet my passion, though a
giant from its birth, was too strange, wild, and impracticable, for me to feel
at once the misery I perceived in Perdita. How should I act? She had not
confided in me; I could not demand an explanation from Raymond without the
hazard of betraying what was perhaps her most treasured secret. I would obtain
the truth from her the following day—in the mean time—But, while I
was occupied by multiplying reflections, Lord Raymond returned. He asked for my
sister; and I delivered her message. After musing on it for a moment, he asked
me if I were about to return to London, and if I would accompany him: I
consented. He was full of thought, and remained silent during a considerable
part of our ride; at length he said, “I must apologize to you for my
abstraction; the truth is, Ryland’s motion comes on to-night, and I am
considering my reply.”


Ryland was the leader of the popular party, a hard-headed man, and in his way
eloquent; he had obtained leave to bring in a bill making it treason to
endeavour to change the present state of the English government and the
standing laws of the republic. This attack was directed against Raymond and his
machinations for the restoration of the monarchy.


Raymond asked me if I would accompany him to the House that evening. I
remembered my pursuit for intelligence concerning Adrian; and, knowing that my
time would be fully occupied, I excused myself. “Nay,” said my
companion, “I can free you from your present impediment. You are going to
make enquiries concerning the Earl of Windsor. I can answer them at once, he is
at the Duke of Athol’s seat at Dunkeld. On the first approach of his
disorder, he travelled about from one place to another; until, arriving at that
romantic seclusion he refused to quit it, and we made arrangements with the
Duke for his continuing there.”


I was hurt by the careless tone with which he conveyed this information, and
replied coldly: “I am obliged to you for your intelligence, and will
avail myself of it.”


“You shall, Verney,” said he, “and if you continue of the
same mind, I will facilitate your views. But first witness, I beseech you, the
result of this night’s contest, and the triumph I am about to achieve, if
I may so call it, while I fear that victory is to me defeat. What can I do? My
dearest hopes appear to be near their fulfilment. The ex-queen gives me Idris;
Adrian is totally unfitted to succeed to the earldom, and that earldom in my
hands becomes a kingdom. By the reigning God it is true; the paltry earldom of
Windsor shall no longer content him, who will inherit the rights which must for
ever appertain to the person who possesses it. The Countess can never forget
that she has been a queen, and she disdains to leave a diminished inheritance
to her children; her power and my wit will rebuild the throne, and this brow
will be clasped by a kingly diadem.—I can do this—I can marry
Idris.”—-


He stopped abruptly, his countenance darkened, and its expression changed again
and again under the influence of internal passion. I asked, “Does Lady
Idris love you?”


“What a question,” replied he laughing. “She will of course,
as I shall her, when we are married.”


“You begin late,” said I, ironically, “marriage is usually
considered the grave, and not the cradle of love. So you are about to love her,
but do not already?”


“Do not catechise me, Lionel; I will do my duty by her, be assured. Love!
I must steel my heart against that; expel it from its tower of strength,
barricade it out: the fountain of love must cease to play, its waters be dried
up, and all passionate thoughts attendant on it die—that is to say, the
love which would rule me, not that which I rule. Idris is a gentle, pretty,
sweet little girl; it is impossible not to have an affection for her, and I
have a very sincere one; only do not speak of love —love, the tyrant and
the tyrant-queller; love, until now my conqueror, now my slave; the hungry
fire, the untameable beast, the fanged snake—no—no—I will
have nothing to do with that love. Tell me, Lionel, do you consent that I
should marry this young lady?”


He bent his keen eyes upon me, and my uncontrollable heart swelled in my bosom.
I replied in a calm voice—but how far from calm was the thought imaged by
my still words—“Never! I can never consent that Lady Idris should
be united to one who does not love her.”


“Because you love her yourself.”


“Your Lordship might have spared that taunt; I do not, dare not love
her.”


“At least,” he continued haughtily, “she does not love you. I
would not marry a reigning sovereign, were I not sure that her heart was free.
But, O, Lionel! a kingdom is a word of might, and gently sounding are the terms
that compose the style of royalty. Were not the mightiest men of the olden
times kings? Alexander was a king; Solomon, the wisest of men, was a king;
Napoleon was a king; Cæsar died in his attempt to become one, and Cromwell,
the puritan and king-killer, aspired to regality. The father of Adrian yielded
up the already broken sceptre of England; but I will rear the fallen plant,
join its dismembered frame, and exalt it above all the flowers of the field.


“You need not wonder that I freely discover Adrian’s abode. Do not
suppose that I am wicked or foolish enough to found my purposed sovereignty on
a fraud, and one so easily discovered as the truth or falsehood of the
Earl’s insanity. I am just come from him. Before I decided on my marriage
with Idris, I resolved to see him myself again, and to judge of the probability
of his recovery.—He is irrecoverably mad.”


I gasped for breath—


“I will not detail to you,” continued Raymond, “the
melancholy particulars. You shall see him, and judge for yourself; although I
fear this visit, useless to him, will be insufferably painful to you. It has
weighed on my spirits ever since. Excellent and gentle as he is even in the
downfall of his reason, I do not worship him as you do, but I would give all my
hopes of a crown and my right hand to boot, to see him restored to
himself.”


His voice expressed the deepest compassion: “Thou most unaccountable
being,” I cried, “whither will thy actions tend, in all this maze
of purpose in which thou seemest lost?”


“Whither indeed? To a crown, a golden be-gemmed crown, I hope; and yet I
dare not trust and though I dream of a crown and wake for one, ever and anon a
busy devil whispers to me, that it is but a fool’s cap that I seek, and
that were I wise, I should trample on it, and take in its stead, that which is
worth all the crowns of the east and presidentships of the west.”


“And what is that?”


“If I do make it my choice, then you shall know; at present I dare not
speak, even think of it.”


Again he was silent, and after a pause turned to me laughingly. When scorn did
not inspire his mirth, when it was genuine gaiety that painted his features
with a joyous expression, his beauty became super-eminent, divine.
“Verney,” said he, “my first act when I become King of
England, will be to unite with the Greeks, take Constantinople, and subdue all
Asia. I intend to be a warrior, a conqueror; Napoleon’s name shall vail
to mine; and enthusiasts, instead of visiting his rocky grave, and exalting the
merits of the fallen, shall adore my majesty, and magnify my illustrious
achievements.”


I listened to Raymond with intense interest. Could I be other than all ear, to
one who seemed to govern the whole earth in his grasping imagination, and who
only quailed when he attempted to rule himself. Then on his word and will
depended my own happiness—the fate of all dear to me. I endeavoured to
divine the concealed meaning of his words. Perdita’s name was not
mentioned; yet I could not doubt that love for her caused the vacillation of
purpose that he exhibited. And who was so worthy of love as my noble-minded
sister? Who deserved the hand of this self-exalted king more than she whose
glance belonged to a queen of nations? who loved him, as he did her;
notwithstanding that disappointment quelled her passion, and ambition held
strong combat with his.


We went together to the House in the evening. Raymond, while he knew that his
plans and prospects were to be discussed and decided during the expected
debate, was gay and careless. An hum, like that of ten thousand hives of
swarming bees, stunned us as we entered the coffee-room. Knots of politicians
were assembled with anxious brows and loud or deep voices. The aristocratical
party, the richest and most influential men in England, appeared less agitated
than the others, for the question was to be discussed without their
interference. Near the fire was Ryland and his supporters. Ryland was a man of
obscure birth and of immense wealth, inherited from his father, who had been a
manufacturer. He had witnessed, when a young man, the abdication of the king,
and the amalgamation of the two houses of Lords and Commons; he had sympathized
with these popular encroachments, and it had been the business of his life to
consolidate and encrease them. Since then, the influence of the landed
proprietors had augmented; and at first Ryland was not sorry to observe the
machinations of Lord Raymond, which drew off many of his opponent’s
partizans. But the thing was now going too far. The poorer nobility hailed the
return of sovereignty, as an event which would restore them to their power and
rights, now lost. The half extinct spirit of royalty roused itself in the minds
of men; and they, willing slaves, self-constituted subjects, were ready to bend
their necks to the yoke. Some erect and manly spirits still remained, pillars
of state; but the word republic had grown stale to the vulgar ear; and
many—the event would prove whether it was a majority— pined for the
tinsel and show of royalty. Ryland was roused to resistance; he asserted that
his sufferance alone had permitted the encrease of this party; but the time for
indulgence was passed, and with one motion of his arm he would sweep away the
cobwebs that blinded his countrymen.


When Raymond entered the coffee-room, his presence was hailed by his friends
almost with a shout. They gathered round him, counted their numbers, and
detailed the reasons why they were now to receive an addition of such and such
members, who had not yet declared themselves. Some trifling business of the
House having been gone through, the leaders took their seats in the chamber;
the clamour of voices continued, till Ryland arose to speak, and then the
slightest whispered observation was audible. All eyes were fixed upon him as he
stood—ponderous of frame, sonorous of voice, and with a manner which,
though not graceful, was impressive. I turned from his marked, iron countenance
to Raymond, whose face, veiled by a smile, would not betray his care; yet his
lips quivered somewhat, and his hand clasped the bench on which he sat, with a
convulsive strength that made the muscles start again.


Ryland began by praising the present state of the British empire. He recalled
past years to their memory; the miserable contentions which in the time of our
fathers arose almost to civil war, the abdication of the late king, and the
foundation of the republic. He described this republic; shewed how it gave
privilege to each individual in the state, to rise to consequence, and even to
temporary sovereignty. He compared the royal and republican spirit; shewed how
the one tended to enslave the minds of men; while all the institutions of the
other served to raise even the meanest among us to something great and good. He
shewed how England had become powerful, and its inhabitants valiant and wise,
by means of the freedom they enjoyed. As he spoke, every heart swelled with
pride, and every cheek glowed with delight to remember, that each one there was
English, and that each supported and contributed to the happy state of things
now commemorated. Ryland’s fervour increased—his eyes lighted
up—his voice assumed the tone of passion. There was one man, he
continued, who wished to alter all this, and bring us back to our days of
impotence and contention:—one man, who would dare arrogate the honour
which was due to all who claimed England as their birthplace, and set his name
and style above the name and style of his country. I saw at this juncture that
Raymond changed colour; his eyes were withdrawn from the orator, and cast on
the ground; the listeners turned from one to the other; but in the meantime the
speaker’s voice filled their ears—the thunder of his denunciations
influenced their senses. The very boldness of his language gave him weight;
each knew that he spoke truth—a truth known, but not acknowledged. He
tore from reality the mask with which she had been clothed; and the purposes of
Raymond, which before had crept around, ensnaring by stealth, now stood a
hunted stag—even at bay—as all perceived who watched the
irrepressible changes of his countenance. Ryland ended by moving, that any
attempt to re-erect the kingly power should be declared treason, and he a
traitor who should endeavour to change the present form of government. Cheers
and loud acclamations followed the close of his speech.


After his motion had been seconded, Lord Raymond rose,—his countenance
bland, his voice softly melodious, his manner soothing, his grace and sweetness
came like the mild breathing of a flute, after the loud, organ-like voice of
his adversary. He rose, he said, to speak in favour of the honourable
member’s motion, with one slight amendment subjoined. He was ready to go
back to old times, and commemorate the contests of our fathers, and the
monarch’s abdication. Nobly and greatly, he said, had the illustrious and
last sovereign of England sacrificed himself to the apparent good of his
country, and divested himself of a power which could only be maintained by the
blood of his subjects—these subjects named so no more, these, his friends
and equals, had in gratitude conferred certain favours and distinctions on him
and his family for ever. An ample estate was allotted to them, and they took
the first rank among the peers of Great Britain. Yet it might be conjectured
that they had not forgotten their ancient heritage; and it was hard that his
heir should suffer alike with any other pretender, if he attempted to regain
what by ancient right and inheritance belonged to him. He did not say that he
should favour such an attempt; but he did say that such an attempt would be
venial; and, if the aspirant did not go so far as to declare war, and erect a
standard in the kingdom, his fault ought to be regarded with an indulgent eye.
In his amendment he proposed, that an exception should be made in the bill in
favour of any person who claimed the sovereign power in right of the earls of
Windsor. Nor did Raymond make an end without drawing in vivid and glowing
colours, the splendour of a kingdom, in opposition to the commercial spirit of
republicanism. He asserted, that each individual under the English monarchy,
was then as now, capable of attaining high rank and power—with one only
exception, that of the function of chief magistrate; higher and nobler rank,
than a bartering, timorous commonwealth could afford. And for this one
exception, to what did it amount? The nature of riches and influence forcibly
confined the list of candidates to a few of the wealthiest; and it was much to
be feared, that the ill-humour and contention generated by this triennial
struggle, would counterbalance its advantages in impartial eyes. I can ill
record the flow of language and graceful turns of expression, the wit and easy
raillery that gave vigour and influence to his speech. His manner, timid at
first, became firm—his changeful face was lit up to superhuman
brilliancy; his voice, various as music, was like that enchanting.


It were useless to record the debate that followed this harangue. Party
speeches were delivered, which clothed the question in cant, and veiled its
simple meaning in a woven wind of words. The motion was lost; Ryland withdrew
in rage and despair; and Raymond, gay and exulting, retired to dream of his
future kingdom.

</div></body></text></TEI>