<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Last Man</title><author>Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797-1851)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Henry Colburn</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1826</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="30">
CHAPTER VII.

These events occupied so much time, that June had numbered more than half its
days, before we again commenced our long-protracted journey. The day after my
return to Versailles, six men, from among those I had left at
Villeneuve-la-Guiard, arrived, with intelligence, that the rest of the troop
had already proceeded towards Switzerland. We went forward in the same track.


It is strange, after an interval of time, to look back on a period, which,
though short in itself, appeared, when in actual progress, to be drawn out
interminably. By the end of July we entered Dijon; by the end of July those
hours, days, and weeks had mingled with the ocean of forgotten time, which in
their passage teemed with fatal events and agonizing sorrow. By the end of
July, little more than a month had gone by, if man’s life were measured
by the rising and setting of the sun: but, alas! in that interval ardent youth
had become grey-haired; furrows deep and uneraseable were trenched in the
blooming cheek of the young mother; the elastic limbs of early manhood,
paralyzed as by the burthen of years, assumed the decrepitude of age. Nights
passed, during whose fatal darkness the sun grew old before it rose; and
burning days, to cool whose baleful heat the balmy eve, lingering far in
eastern climes, came lagging and ineffectual; days, in which the dial, radiant
in its noon-day station, moved not its shadow the space of a little hour, until
a whole life of sorrow had brought the sufferer to an untimely grave.


We departed from Versailles fifteen hundred souls. We set out on the eighteenth
of June. We made a long procession, in which was contained every dear
relationship, or tie of love, that existed in human society. Fathers and
husbands, with guardian care, gathered their dear relatives around them; wives
and mothers looked for support to the manly form beside them, and then with
tender anxiety bent their eyes on the infant troop around. They were sad, but
not hopeless. Each thought that someone would be saved; each, with that
pertinacious optimism, which to the last characterized our human nature,
trusted that their beloved family would be the one preserved.


We passed through France, and found it empty of inhabitants. Some one or two
natives survived in the larger towns, which they roamed through like ghosts; we
received therefore small encrease to our numbers, and such decrease through
death, that at last it became easier to count the scanty list of survivors. As
we never deserted any of the sick, until their death permitted us to commit
their remains to the shelter of a grave, our journey was long, while every day
a frightful gap was made in our troop—they died by tens, by fifties, by
hundreds. No mercy was shewn by death; we ceased to expect it, and every day
welcomed the sun with the feeling that we might never see it rise again.


The nervous terrors and fearful visions which had scared us during the spring,
continued to visit our coward troop during this sad journey. Every evening
brought its fresh creation of spectres; a ghost was depicted by every blighted
tree; and appalling shapes were manufactured from each shaggy bush. By degrees
these common marvels palled on us, and then other wonders were called into
being. Once it was confidently asserted, that the sun rose an hour later than
its seasonable time; again it was discovered that he grew paler and paler; that
shadows took an uncommon appearance. It was impossible to have imagined, during
the usual calm routine of life men had before experienced, the terrible effects
produced by these extravagant delusions: in truth, of such little worth are our
senses, when unsupported by concurring testimony, that it was with the utmost
difficulty I kept myself free from the belief in supernatural events, to which
the major part of our people readily gave credit. Being one sane amidst a crowd
of the mad, I hardly dared assert to my own mind, that the vast luminary had
undergone no change—that the shadows of night were unthickened by
innumerable shapes of awe and terror; or that the wind, as it sung in the
trees, or whistled round an empty building, was not pregnant with sounds of
wailing and despair. Sometimes realities took ghostly shapes; and it was
impossible for one’s blood not to curdle at the perception of an evident
mixture of what we knew to be true, with the visionary semblance of all that we
feared.


Once, at the dusk of the evening, we saw a figure all in white, apparently of
more than human stature, flourishing about the road, now throwing up its arms,
now leaping to an astonishing height in the air, then turning round several
times successively, then raising itself to its full height and gesticulating
violently. Our troop, on the alert to discover and believe in the supernatural,
made a halt at some distance from this shape; and, as it became darker, there
was something appalling even to the incredulous, in the lonely spectre, whose
gambols, if they hardly accorded with spiritual dignity, were beyond human
powers. Now it leapt right up in the air, now sheer over a high hedge, and was
again the moment after in the road before us. By the time I came up, the fright
experienced by the spectators of this ghostly exhibition, began to manifest
itself in the flight of some, and the close huddling together of the rest. Our
goblin now perceived us; he approached, and, as we drew reverentially back,
made a low bow. The sight was irresistibly ludicrous even to our hapless band,
and his politeness was hailed by a shout of laughter;—then, again
springing up, as a last effort, it sunk to the ground, and became almost
invisible through the dusky night. This circumstance again spread silence and
fear through the troop; the more courageous at length advanced, and, raising
the dying wretch, discovered the tragic explanation of this wild scene. It was
an opera-dancer, and had been one of the troop which deserted from
Villeneuve-la-Guiard: falling sick, he had been deserted by his companions; in
an access of delirium he had fancied himself on the stage, and, poor fellow,
his dying sense eagerly accepted the last human applause that could ever be
bestowed on his grace and agility.


At another time we were haunted for several days by an apparition, to which our
people gave the appellation of the Black Spectre. We never saw it except at
evening, when his coal black steed, his mourning dress, and plume of black
feathers, had a majestic and awe-striking appearance; his face, one said, who
had seen it for a moment, was ashy pale; he had lingered far behind the rest of
his troop, and suddenly at a turn in the road, saw the Black Spectre coming
towards him; he hid himself in fear, and the horse and his rider slowly past,
while the moonbeams fell on the face of the latter, displaying its unearthly
hue. Sometimes at dead of night, as we watched the sick, we heard one galloping
through the town; it was the Black Spectre come in token of inevitable death.
He grew giant tall to vulgar eyes; an icy atmosphere, they said, surrounded
him; when he was heard, all animals shuddered, and the dying knew that their
last hour was come. It was Death himself, they declared, come visibly to seize
on subject earth, and quell at once our decreasing numbers, sole rebels to his
law. One day at noon, we saw a dark mass on the road before us, and, coming up,
beheld the Black Spectre fallen from his horse, lying in the agonies of disease
upon the ground. He did not survive many hours; and his last words disclosed
the secret of his mysterious conduct. He was a French noble of distinction,
who, from the effects of plague, had been left alone in his district; during
many months, he had wandered from town to town, from province to province,
seeking some survivor for a companion, and abhorring the loneliness to which he
was condemned. When he discovered our troop, fear of contagion conquered his
love of society. He dared not join us, yet he could not resolve to lose sight
of us, sole human beings who besides himself existed in wide and fertile
France; so he accompanied us in the spectral guise I have described, till
pestilence gathered him to a larger congregation, even that of Dead Mankind.


It had been well, if such vain terrors could have distracted our thoughts from
more tangible evils. But these were too dreadful and too many not to force
themselves into every thought, every moment, of our lives. We were obliged to
halt at different periods for days together, till another and yet another was
consigned as a clod to the vast clod which had been once our living mother.
Thus we continued travelling during the hottest season; and it was not till the
first of August, that we, the emigrants,—reader, there were just eighty
of us in number,—entered the gates of Dijon.


We had expected this moment with eagerness, for now we had accomplished the
worst part of our drear journey, and Switzerland was near at hand. Yet how
could we congratulate ourselves on any event thus imperfectly fulfilled? Were
these miserable beings, who, worn and wretched, passed in sorrowful procession,
the sole remnants of the race of man, which, like a flood, had once spread over
and possessed the whole earth? It had come down clear and unimpeded from its
primal mountain source in Ararat, and grew from a puny streamlet to a vast
perennial river, generation after generation flowing on ceaselessly. The same,
but diversified, it grew, and swept onwards towards the absorbing ocean, whose
dim shores we now reached. It had been the mere plaything of nature, when first
it crept out of uncreative void into light; but thought brought forth power and
knowledge; and, clad with these, the race of man assumed dignity and authority.
It was then no longer the mere gardener of earth, or the shepherd of her
flocks; “it carried with it an imposing and majestic aspect; it had a
pedigree and illustrious ancestors; it had its gallery of portraits, its
monumental inscriptions, its records and
titles.”[24]


This was all over, now that the ocean of death had sucked in the slackening
tide, and its source was dried up. We first had bidden adieu to the state of
things which having existed many thousand years, seemed eternal; such a state
of government, obedience, traffic, and domestic intercourse, as had moulded our
hearts and capacities, as far back as memory could reach. Then to patriotic
zeal, to the arts, to reputation, to enduring fame, to the name of country, we
had bidden farewell. We saw depart all hope of retrieving our ancient
state—all expectation, except the feeble one of saving our individual
lives from the wreck of the past. To preserve these we had quitted
England—England, no more; for without her children, what name could that
barren island claim? With tenacious grasp we clung to such rule and order as
could best save us; trusting that, if a little colony could be preserved, that
would suffice at some remoter period to restore the lost community of mankind.


But the game is up! We must all die; nor leave survivor nor heir to the wide
inheritance of earth. We must all die! The species of man must perish; his
frame of exquisite workmanship; the wondrous mechanism of his senses; the noble
proportion of his godlike limbs; his mind, the throned king of these; must
perish. Will the earth still keep her place among the planets; will she still
journey with unmarked regularity round the sun; will the seasons change, the
trees adorn themselves with leaves, and flowers shed their fragrance, in
solitude? Will the mountains remain unmoved, and streams still keep a downward
course towards the vast abyss; will the tides rise and fall, and the winds fan
universal nature; will beasts pasture, birds fly, and fishes swim, when man,
the lord, possessor, perceiver, and recorder of all these things, has passed
away, as though he had never been? O, what mockery is this! Surely death is not
death, and humanity is not extinct; but merely passed into other shapes,
unsubjected to our perceptions. Death is a vast portal, an high road to life:
let us hasten to pass; let us exist no more in this living death, but die that
we may live!


We had longed with inexpressible earnestness to reach Dijon, since we had fixed
on it, as a kind of station in our progress. But now we entered it with a
torpor more painful than acute suffering. We had come slowly but irrevocably to
the opinion, that our utmost efforts would not preserve one human being alive.
We took our hands therefore away from the long grasped rudder; and the frail
vessel on which we floated, seemed, the government over her suspended, to rush,
prow foremost, into the dark abyss of the billows. A gush of grief, a wanton
profusion of tears, and vain laments, and overflowing tenderness, and
passionate but fruitless clinging to the priceless few that remained, was
followed by languor and recklessness.


During this disastrous journey we lost all those, not of our own family, to
whom we had particularly attached ourselves among the survivors. It were not
well to fill these pages with a mere catalogue of losses; yet I cannot refrain
from this last mention of those principally dear to us. The little girl whom
Adrian had rescued from utter desertion, during our ride through London on the
twentieth of November, died at Auxerre. The poor child had attached herself
greatly to us; and the suddenness of her death added to our sorrow. In the
morning we had seen her apparently in health—in the evening, Lucy, before
we retired to rest, visited our quarters to say that she was dead. Poor Lucy
herself only survived, till we arrived at Dijon. She had devoted herself
throughout to the nursing the sick, and attending the friendless. Her excessive
exertions brought on a slow fever, which ended in the dread disease whose
approach soon released her from her sufferings. She had throughout been
endeared to us by her good qualities, by her ready and cheerful execution of
every duty, and mild acquiescence in every turn of adversity. When we consigned
her to the tomb, we seemed at the same time to bid a final adieu to those
peculiarly feminine virtues conspicuous in her; uneducated and unpretending as
she was, she was distinguished for patience, forbearance, and sweetness. These,
with all their train of qualities peculiarly English, would never again be
revived for us. This type of all that was most worthy of admiration in her
class among my countrywomen, was placed under the sod of desert France; and it
was as a second separation from our country to have lost sight of her for ever.


The Countess of Windsor died during our abode at Dijon. One morning I was
informed that she wished to see me. Her message made me remember, that several
days had elapsed since I had last seen her. Such a circumstance had often
occurred during our journey, when I remained behind to watch to their close the
last moments of some one of our hapless comrades, and the rest of the troop
past on before me. But there was something in the manner of her messenger, that
made me suspect that all was not right. A caprice of the imagination caused me
to conjecture that some ill had occurred to Clara or Evelyn, rather than to
this aged lady. Our fears, for ever on the stretch, demanded a nourishment of
horror; and it seemed too natural an occurrence, too like past times, for the
old to die before the young. I found the venerable mother of my Idris lying on
a couch, her tall emaciated figure stretched out; her face fallen away, from
which the nose stood out in sharp profile, and her large dark eyes, hollow and
deep, gleamed with such light as may edge a thunder cloud at sun-set. All was
shrivelled and dried up, except these lights; her voice too was fearfully
changed, as she spoke to me at intervals. “I am afraid,” said she,
“that it is selfish in me to have asked you to visit the old woman again,
before she dies: yet perhaps it would have been a greater shock to hear
suddenly that I was dead, than to see me first thus.”


I clasped her shrivelled hand: “Are you indeed so ill?” I asked.


“Do you not perceive death in my face,” replied she, “it is
strange; I ought to have expected this, and yet I confess it has taken me
unaware. I never clung to life, or enjoyed it, till these last months, while
among those I senselessly deserted: and it is hard to be snatched immediately
away. I am glad, however, that I am not a victim of the plague; probably I
should have died at this hour, though the world had continued as it was in my
youth.”


She spoke with difficulty, and I perceived that she regretted the necessity of
death, even more than she cared to confess. Yet she had not to complain of an
undue shortening of existence; her faded person shewed that life had naturally
spent itself. We had been alone at first; now Clara entered; the Countess
turned to her with a smile, and took the hand of this lovely child; her roseate
palm and snowy fingers, contrasted with relaxed fibres and yellow hue of those
of her aged friend; she bent to kiss her, touching her withered mouth with the
warm, full lips of youth. “Verney,” said the Countess, “I
need not recommend this dear girl to you, for your own sake you will preserve
her. Were the world as it was, I should have a thousand sage precautions to
impress, that one so sensitive, good, and beauteous, might escape the dangers
that used to lurk for the destruction of the fair and excellent. This is all
nothing now.


“I commit you, my kind nurse, to your uncle’s care; to yours I
entrust the dearest relic of my better self. Be to Adrian, sweet one, what you
have been to me—enliven his sadness with your sprightly sallies; sooth
his anguish by your sober and inspired converse, when he is dying; nurse him as
you have done me.”


Clara burst into tears; “Kind girl,” said the Countess, “do
not weep for me. Many dear friends are left to you.”


“And yet,” cried Clara, “you talk of their dying also. This
is indeed cruel —how could I live, if they were gone? If it were possible
for my beloved protector to die before me, I could not nurse him; I could only
die too.”


The venerable lady survived this scene only twenty-four hours. She was the last
tie binding us to the ancient state of things. It was impossible to look on
her, and not call to mind in their wonted guise, events and persons, as alien
to our present situation as the disputes of Themistocles and Aristides, or the
wars of the two roses in our native land. The crown of England had pressed her
brow; the memory of my father and his misfortunes, the vain struggles of the
late king, the images of Raymond, Evadne, and Perdita, who had lived in the
world’s prime, were brought vividly before us. We consigned her to the
oblivious tomb with reluctance; and when I turned from her grave, Janus veiled
his retrospective face; that which gazed on future generations had long lost
its faculty.


After remaining a week at Dijon, until thirty of our number deserted the vacant
ranks of life, we continued our way towards Geneva. At noon on the second day
we arrived at the foot of Jura. We halted here during the heat of the day. Here
fifty human beings—fifty, the only human beings that survived of the
food-teeming earth, assembled to read in the looks of each other ghastly
plague, or wasting sorrow, desperation, or worse, carelessness of future or
present evil. Here we assembled at the foot of this mighty wall of mountain,
under a spreading walnut tree; a brawling stream refreshed the green sward by
its sprinkling; and the busy grasshopper chirped among the thyme. We clustered
together a group of wretched sufferers. A mother cradled in her enfeebled arms
the child, last of many, whose glazed eye was about to close for ever. Here
beauty, late glowing in youthful lustre and consciousness, now wan and
neglected, knelt fanning with uncertain motion the beloved, who lay striving to
paint his features, distorted by illness, with a thankful smile. There an
hard-featured, weather-worn veteran, having prepared his meal, sat, his head
dropped on his breast, the useless knife falling from his grasp, his limbs
utterly relaxed, as thought of wife and child, and dearest relative, all lost,
passed across his recollection. There sat a man who for forty years had basked
in fortune’s tranquil sunshine; he held the hand of his last hope, his
beloved daughter, who had just attained womanhood; and he gazed on her with
anxious eyes, while she tried to rally her fainting spirit to comfort him. Here
a servant, faithful to the last, though dying, waited on one, who, though still
erect with health, gazed with gasping fear on the variety of woe around.


Adrian stood leaning against a tree; he held a book in his hand, but his eye
wandered from the pages, and sought mine; they mingled a sympathetic glance;
his looks confessed that his thoughts had quitted the inanimate print, for
pages more pregnant with meaning, more absorbing, spread out before him. By the
margin of the stream, apart from all, in a tranquil nook, where the purling
brook kissed the green sward gently, Clara and Evelyn were at play, sometimes
beating the water with large boughs, sometimes watching the summer-flies that
sported upon it. Evelyn now chased a butterfly—now gathered a flower for
his cousin; and his laughing cherub-face and clear brow told of the light heart
that beat in his bosom. Clara, though she endeavoured to give herself up to his
amusement, often forgot him, as she turned to observe Adrian and me. She was
now fourteen, and retained her childish appearance, though in height a woman;
she acted the part of the tenderest mother to my little orphan boy; to see her
playing with him, or attending silently and submissively on our wants, you
thought only of her admirable docility and patience; but, in her soft eyes, and
the veined curtains that veiled them, in the clearness of her marmoreal brow,
and the tender expression of her lips, there was an intelligence and beauty
that at once excited admiration and love.


When the sun had sunk towards the precipitate west, and the evening shadows
grew long, we prepared to ascend the mountain. The attention that we were
obliged to pay to the sick, made our progress slow. The winding road, though
steep, presented a confined view of rocky fields and hills, each hiding the
other, till our farther ascent disclosed them in succession. We were seldom
shaded from the declining sun, whose slant beams were instinct with exhausting
heat. There are times when minor difficulties grow gigantic —times, when
as the Hebrew poet expressively terms it, “the grasshopper is a
burthen;” so was it with our ill fated party this evening. Adrian,
usually the first to rally his spirits, and dash foremost into fatigue and
hardship, with relaxed limbs and declined head, the reins hanging loosely in
his grasp, left the choice of the path to the instinct of his horse, now and
then painfully rousing himself, when the steepness of the ascent required that
he should keep his seat with better care. Fear and horror encompassed me. Did
his languid air attest that he also was struck with contagion? How long, when I
look on this matchless specimen of mortality, may I perceive that his thought
answers mine? how long will those limbs obey the kindly spirit within? how long
will light and life dwell in the eyes of this my sole remaining friend? Thus
pacing slowly, each hill surmounted, only presented another to be ascended;
each jutting corner only discovered another, sister to the last, endlessly.
Sometimes the pressure of sickness in one among us, caused the whole cavalcade
to halt; the call for water, the eagerly expressed wish to repose; the cry of
pain, and suppressed sob of the mourner—such were the sorrowful
attendants of our passage of the Jura.


Adrian had gone first. I saw him, while I was detained by the loosening of a
girth, struggling with the upward path, seemingly more difficult than any we
had yet passed. He reached the top, and the dark outline of his figure stood in
relief against the sky. He seemed to behold something unexpected and wonderful;
for, pausing, his head stretched out, his arms for a moment extended, he seemed
to give an All Hail! to some new vision. Urged by curiosity, I hurried to join
him. After battling for many tedious minutes with the precipice, the same scene
presented itself to me, which had wrapt him in extatic wonder.


Nature, or nature’s favourite, this lovely earth, presented her most
unrivalled beauties in resplendent and sudden exhibition. Below, far, far
below, even as it were in the yawning abyss of the ponderous globe, lay the
placid and azure expanse of lake Leman; vine-covered hills hedged it in, and
behind dark mountains in cone-like shape, or irregular cyclopean wall, served
for further defence. But beyond, and high above all, as if the spirits of the
air had suddenly unveiled their bright abodes, placed in scaleless altitude in
the stainless sky, heaven-kissing, companions of the unattainable ether, were
the glorious Alps, clothed in dazzling robes of light by the setting sun. And,
as if the world’s wonders were never to be exhausted, their vast
immensities, their jagged crags, and roseate painting, appeared again in the
lake below, dipping their proud heights beneath the unruffled
waves—palaces for the Naiads of the placid waters. Towns and villages lay
scattered at the foot of Jura, which, with dark ravine, and black promontories,
stretched its roots into the watery expanse beneath. Carried away by wonder, I
forgot the death of man, and the living and beloved friend near me. When I
turned, I saw tears streaming from his eyes; his thin hands pressed one against
the other, his animated countenance beaming with admiration; “Why,”
cried he, at last, “Why, oh heart, whisperest thou of grief to me? Drink
in the beauty of that scene, and possess delight beyond what a fabled paradise
could afford.”


By degrees, our whole party surmounting the steep, joined us, not one among
them, but gave visible tokens of admiration, surpassing any before experienced.
One cried, “God reveals his heaven to us; we may die blessed.”
Another and another, with broken exclamations, and extravagant phrases,
endeavoured to express the intoxicating effect of this wonder of nature. So we
remained awhile, lightened of the pressing burthen of fate, forgetful of death,
into whose night we were about to plunge; no longer reflecting that our eyes
now and for ever were and would be the only ones which might perceive the
divine magnificence of this terrestrial exhibition. An enthusiastic transport,
akin to happiness, burst, like a sudden ray from the sun, on our darkened life.
Precious attribute of woe-worn humanity! that can snatch extatic emotion, even
from under the very share and harrow, that ruthlessly ploughs up and lays waste
every hope.


This evening was marked by another event. Passing through Ferney in our way to
Geneva, unaccustomed sounds of music arose from the rural church which stood
embosomed in trees, surrounded by smokeless, vacant cottages. The peal of an
organ with rich swell awoke the mute air, lingering along, and mingling with
the intense beauty that clothed the rocks and woods, and waves around.
Music—the language of the immortals, disclosed to us as testimony of
their existence—music, “silver key of the fountain of tears,”
child of love, soother of grief, inspirer of heroism and radiant thoughts, O
music, in this our desolation, we had forgotten thee! Nor pipe at eve cheered
us, nor harmony of voice, nor linked thrill of string; thou camest upon us now,
like the revealing of other forms of being; and transported as we had been by
the loveliness of nature, fancying that we beheld the abode of spirits, now we
might well imagine that we heard their melodious communings. We paused in such
awe as would seize on a pale votarist, visiting some holy shrine at midnight;
if she beheld animated and smiling, the image which she worshipped. We all
stood mute; many knelt. In a few minutes however, we were recalled to human
wonder and sympathy by a familiar strain. The air was Haydn’s
“New-Created World,” and, old and drooping as humanity had become,
the world yet fresh as at creation’s day, might still be worthily
celebrated by such an hymn of praise. Adrian and I entered the church; the nave
was empty, though the smoke of incense rose from the altar, bringing with it
the recollection of vast congregations, in once thronged cathedrals; we went
into the loft. A blind old man sat at the bellows; his whole soul was ear; and
as he sat in the attitude of attentive listening, a bright glow of pleasure was
diffused over his countenance; for, though his lack-lustre eye could not
reflect the beam, yet his parted lips, and every line of his face and venerable
brow spoke delight. A young woman sat at the keys, perhaps twenty years of age.
Her auburn hair hung on her neck, and her fair brow shone in its own beauty;
but her drooping eyes let fall fast-flowing tears, while the constraint she
exercised to suppress her sobs, and still her trembling, flushed her else pale
cheek; she was thin; languor, and alas! sickness, bent her form. We stood
looking at the pair, forgetting what we heard in the absorbing sight; till, the
last chord struck, the peal died away in lessening reverberations. The mighty
voice, inorganic we might call it, for we could in no way associate it with
mechanism of pipe or key, stilled its sonorous tone, and the girl, turning to
lend her assistance to her aged companion, at length perceived us.


It was her father; and she, since childhood, had been the guide of his darkened
steps. They were Germans from Saxony, and, emigrating thither but a few years
before, had formed new ties with the surrounding villagers. About the time that
the pestilence had broken out, a young German student had joined them. Their
simple history was easily divined. He, a noble, loved the fair daughter of the
poor musician, and followed them in their flight from the persecutions of his
friends; but soon the mighty leveller came with unblunted scythe to mow,
together with the grass, the tall flowers of the field. The youth was an early
victim. She preserved herself for her father’s sake. His blindness
permitted her to continue a delusion, at first the child of accident—and
now solitary beings, sole survivors in the land, he remained unacquainted with
the change, nor was aware that when he listened to his child’s music, the
mute mountains, senseless lake, and unconscious trees, were, himself excepted,
her sole auditors.


The very day that we arrived she had been attacked by symptomatic illness. She
was paralyzed with horror at the idea of leaving her aged, sightless father
alone on the empty earth; but she had not courage to disclose the truth, and
the very excess of her desperation animated her to surpassing exertions. At the
accustomed vesper hour, she led him to the chapel; and, though trembling and
weeping on his account, she played, without fault in time, or error in note,
the hymn written to celebrate the creation of the adorned earth, soon to be her
tomb.


We came to her like visitors from heaven itself; her high-wrought courage; her
hardly sustained firmness, fled with the appearance of relief. With a shriek
she rushed towards us, embraced the knees of Adrian, and uttering but the
words, “O save my father!” with sobs and hysterical cries, opened
the long-shut floodgates of her woe.


Poor girl!—she and her father now lie side by side, beneath the high
walnut-tree where her lover reposes, and which in her dying moments she had
pointed out to us. Her father, at length aware of his daughter’s danger,
unable to see the changes of her dear countenance, obstinately held her hand,
till it was chilled and stiffened by death. Nor did he then move or speak,
till, twelve hours after, kindly death took him to his breakless repose. They
rest beneath the sod, the tree their monument;—the hallowed spot is
distinct in my memory, paled in by craggy Jura, and the far, immeasurable Alps;
the spire of the church they frequented still points from out the embosoming
trees; and though her hand be cold, still methinks the sounds of divine music
which they loved wander about, solacing their gentle ghosts.


 [24]
Burke’s Reflections on the French Revolution.

</div></body></text></TEI>