<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="10">
65
SECTION IX.

Rotation of the Sun and Planets—Saturn’s Rings—Periods of the Rotation
of the Moon and other Satellites equal to the Periods of their Revolutions—Form
of Lunar Spheroid—Libration, Aspect, and Constitution
of the Moon—Rotation of Jupiter’s Satellites.
The oblate form of several of the planets indicates rotatory
motion. This has been confirmed in most cases by tracing spots
on their surface, by which their poles and times of rotation have
been determined. The rotation of Mercury is unknown, on
account of his proximity to the sun; that of the new planets has
not yet been ascertained. The sun revolves in twenty-five days
and ten hours about an axis which is directed towards a point half-way
between the pole-star and α of Lyra, the plane of rotation
being inclined by 7° 30ʹ, or a little more than seven degrees, to the
plane of the ecliptic: it may therefore be concluded that the sun’s
mass is a spheroid, flattened at the poles. From the rotation of
the sun, there was every reason to believe that he has a progressive
motion in space, a circumstance which is confirmed by
observation. But, in consequence of the reaction of the planets,
he describes a small irregular orbit about the centre of gravity
of the system, never deviating from his position by more than
twice his own diameter, or a little more than seven times the
distance of the moon from the earth. The sun and all his
attendants rotate from west to east, on axes that remain nearly
parallel to themselves (N. 140) in every point of their orbit,
and with angular velocities that are sensibly uniform (N. 141).
Although the uniformity in the direction of their rotation is a
circumstance hitherto unaccounted for in the economy of nature,
yet, from the design and adaptation of every other part to the
perfection of the whole, a coincidence so remarkable cannot be
accidental. And, as the revolutions of the planets and satellites
are also from west to east, it is evident that both must have
arisen from the primitive cause which determined the planetary
motions.[6] Indeed, La Place has computed the probability to be
66as four millions to one that all the motions of the planets, both
of rotation and revolution, were at once imparted by an original
common cause, but of which we know neither the nature nor
the epoch.
The larger planets rotate in shorter periods than the smaller
planets and the earth. Their compression is consequently greater,
and the action of the sun and of their satellites occasions a
nutation in their axes and a precession of their equinoxes (N. 147)
similar to that which obtains in the terrestrial spheroid, from the
attraction of the sun and moon on the prominent matter at the
equator. Jupiter revolves in less than ten hours round an axis at
right angles to certain dark belts or bands, which always cross his
equator. (See Plate 1.) This rapid rotation occasions a very great
compression in his form. His equatorial axis exceeds his polar axis
by 6000 miles, whereas the difference in the axes of the earth is
only about twenty-six and a half. It is an evident consequence
of Kepler’s law of the squares of the periodic times of the planets
being as the cubes of the major axes of their orbits, that the
heavenly bodies move slower the farther they are from the sun.
In comparing the periods of the revolutions of Jupiter and
Saturn with the times of their rotation, it appears that a year of
Jupiter contains nearly ten thousand of his days, and that of
Saturn about thirty thousand Saturnian days.
The appearance of Saturn is unparalleled in the system of the
world. He is a spheroid nearly 1000 times larger than the earth,
surrounded by a ring even brighter than himself, which always
remains suspended in the plane of his equator: and, viewed with
a very good telescope, it is found to consist of two concentric
rings, divided by a dark band. The exterior ring, as seen
through Mr. Lassell’s great equatorial at Malta, has a dark-striped
band through the centre, and is altogether less bright
than the interior ring, one half of which is extremely brilliant;
while the interior half is shaded in rings like the seats in
an amphitheatre. Mr. Lassell made the remarkable discovery
of a dark transparent ring, whose edge coincides with the inner
edge of the interior ring, and which occupies about half the
space between it and Saturn. He compares it to a band of dark-coloured
crape drawn across a portion of the disc of the planet,
and the part projected upon the blue sky is also transparent. At
the time these observations were made at Malta, Captain Jacob
discovered the transparent ring at Madras. It is conjectured to be
67fluid; even the luminous rings cannot be very dense, since the
density of Saturn himself is known to be less than the eighth
part of that of the earth. A transit of the ring across a star
might reveal something concerning this wonderful object. The
ball of Saturn is striped by belts of different colours. At the
time of these observations the part above the ring was bright
white; at his equator there was a ruddy belt divided in two,
above which were belts of a bluish green alternately dark and
light, while at the pole there was a circular space of a pale colour.
(See Plate 2.) The mean distance of the interior part of the double
ring from the surface of the planet is about 22,240 miles, it is no
less than 33,360 miles broad, but, by the estimation of Sir John
Herschel, its thickness does not much exceed 100 miles, so that
it appears like a plane. By the laws of mechanics, it is impossible
that this body can retain its position by the adhesion of
its particles alone. It must necessarily revolve with a velocity
that will generate a centrifugal force sufficient to balance the
attraction of Saturn. Observation confirms the truth of these
principles, showing that the rings rotate from west to east about
the planet in ten hours and a half, which is nearly the time a
satellite would take to revolve about Saturn at the same distance.
Their plane is inclined to the ecliptic, at an angle of 28° 10ʹ 44ʺ·5;
in consequence of this obliquity of position, they always appear
elliptical to us, but with an excentricity so variable as even to
be occasionally like a straight line drawn across the planet. In
the beginning of October, 1832, the plane of the rings passed
through the centre of the earth; in that position they are only
visible with very superior instruments, and appear like a fine line
across the disc of Saturn. About the middle of December, in the
same year, the rings became invisible, with ordinary instruments,
on account of their plane passing through the sun. In the end
of April, 1833, the rings vanished a second time, and reappeared
in June of that year. Similar phenomena will occur as often as
Saturn has the same longitude with either node of his rings.
Each side of these rings has alternately fifteen years of sunshine
and fifteen years of darkness.
It is a singular result of theory, that the rings could not
maintain their stability of rotation if they were everywhere of
uniform thickness; for the smallest disturbance would destroy
the equilibrium, which would become more and more deranged,
68till, at last, they would be precipitated on the surface of the
planet. The rings of Saturn must therefore be irregular solids,
of unequal breadth in different parts of the circumference, so that
their centres of gravity do not coincide with the centres of their
figures. Professor Struve has also discovered that the centre of
the rings is not concentric with the centre of Saturn. The
interval between the outer edge of the globe of the planet and
the outer edge of the rings on one side is 11ʺ·272, and, on the
other side, the interval is 11ʺ·390, consequently there is an
excentricity of the globe in the rings of 0ʺ·215. If the rings
obeyed different forces, they would not remain in the same plane,
but the powerful attraction of Saturn always maintains them
and his satellites in the plane of his equator. The rings, by their
mutual action, and that of the sun and satellites, must oscillate
about the centre of Saturn, and produce phenomena of light and
shadow whose periods extend to many years. According to
M. Bessel the mass of Saturn’s ring is equal to the
1⁄118
part of
that of the planet.
The periods of rotation of the moon and the other satellites
are equal to the times of their revolutions, consequently these
bodies always turn the same face to their primaries. However,
as the mean motion of the moon is subject to a secular inequality,
which will ultimately amount to many circumferences (N. 108),
if the rotation of the moon were perfectly uniform and not
affected by the same inequalities, it would cease exactly to
counterbalance the motion of revolution; and the moon, in the
course of ages, would successively and gradually discover every
point of her surface to the earth. But theory proves that this
never can happen; for the rotation of the moon, though it does
not partake of the periodic inequalities of her revolution, is
affected by the same secular variations, so that her motions of
rotation and revolution round the earth will always balance each
other, and remain equal. This circumstance arises from the form
of the lunar spheroid, which has three principal axes of different
lengths at right angles to each other.
The moon is flattened at her poles from her centrifugal force,
therefore her polar axis is the least. The other two are in the
plane of her equator, but that directed towards the earth is the
greatest (N. 142). The attraction of the earth, as if it had
drawn out that part of the moon’s equator, constantly brings the
69greatest axis, and consequently the same hemisphere, towards us,
which makes her rotation participate in the secular variations of
her mean motion of revolution. Even if the angular velocities
of rotation and revolution had not been nicely balanced in the
beginning of the moon’s motion, the attraction of the earth
would have recalled the greatest axis to the direction of the line
joining the centres of the moon and earth; so that it would have
vibrated on each side of that line in the same manner as a
pendulum oscillates on each side of the vertical from the influence
of gravitation. No such libration is perceptible; and, as the
smallest disturbance would make it evident, it is clear that, if
the moon has ever been touched by a comet, the mass of the
latter must have been extremely small. If it had been only
the hundred thousandth part of that of the earth, it would have
rendered the libration sensible. According to analysis, a similar
libration exists in the motions of Jupiter’s satellites, which still
remains insensible to observation, and yet the comet of 1770
passed twice through the midst of them.
The moon, it is true, is liable to librations depending upon the
position of the spectator. At her rising, part of the western edge
of her disc is visible, which is invisible at her setting, and the
contrary takes place with regard to her eastern edge. There are
also librations arising from the relative positions of the earth and
moon in their respective orbits; but, as they are only optical
appearances, one hemisphere will be eternally concealed from the
earth. For the same reason the earth, which must be so splendid
an object to one lunar hemisphere, will be for ever veiled from
the other. On account of these circumstances, the remoter
hemisphere of the moon has its day a fortnight long, and a night
of the same duration, not even enlightened by a moon, while the
favoured side is illuminated by the reflection of the earth during
its long night. A planet exhibiting a surface thirteen times
larger than that of the moon, with all the varieties of clouds,
land, and water, coming successively into view, must be a
splendid object to a lunar traveller in a journey to his antipodes.
The great height of the lunar mountains probably has a considerable
influence on the phenomena of her motion, the more so
as her compression is small, and her mass considerable. In the
curve passing through the poles, and that diameter of the moon
which always points to the earth, nature has furnished a permanent
70meridian, to which the different spots on her surface have
been referred, and their positions are determined with as much
accuracy as those of many of the most remarkable places on the
surface of our globe. According to the observations of Professor
Secchi at Rome, the mountains of the moon are mostly volcanic
and of three kinds. The first and oldest have their borders
obliterated, so that they look like deep wells; the second, which
are of an intermediate class, have elevated, and, for the most
part, regular unbroken edges, with the ground around them
raised to a prodigious extent in proportion to the size of the
volcano, with generally an insulated rock in the centre of the
crater. The third, and most recent class, are very small, and
seem to be the last effort of the expiring volcanic force, which is
probably now extinct.
The distance and minuteness of Jupiter’s satellites render it
extremely difficult to ascertain their rotation. It was, however,
accomplished by Sir William Herschel from their relative brightness.
He observed that they alternately exceed each other in
brilliancy, and, by comparing the maxima and minima of their
illumination with their positions relatively to the sun and to their
primary, he found that, like the moon, the time of their rotation
is equal to the period of their revolution about Jupiter. Miraldi
was led to the same conclusion with regard to the fourth satellite,
from the motion of a spot on its surface.</div></body></text></TEI>