<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="6">
34
SECTION V.

Lunar Theory—Periodic Perturbations of the Moon—Equation of Centre—Evection—Variation—Annual
Equation—Direct and Indirect
Action of Planets—The Moon’s Action on the Earth disturbs her own
Motion—Excentricity and Inclination of Lunar Orbit invariable—Acceleration—Secular
Variation in Nodes and Perigee—Motion
of Nodes and Perigee inseparably connected with the Acceleration—Nutation
of Lunar Orbit—Form and Internal Structure of the Earth
determined from it—Lunar, Solar, and Planetary Eclipses—Occultations
and Lunar Distances—Mean Distance of the Sun from the Earth
obtained from Lunar Theory—Absolute Distances of the Planets, how
found.
Our constant companion, the moon, next claims our attention.
Several circumstances concur to render her motions the most interesting,
and at the same time the most difficult to investigate,
of all the bodies of our system. In the solar system, planet
troubles planet; but, in the lunar theory, the sun is the great
disturbing cause, his vast distance being compensated by his
enormous magnitude, so that the motions of the moon are more
irregular than those of the planets; and, on account of the great
ellipticity of her orbit, and the size of the sun, the approximations
to her motions are tedious and difficult, beyond what those unaccustomed
to such investigations could imagine. The average
distance of the moon from the centre of the earth is only 238,793
miles, so that her motion among the stars is perceptible in a few
hours. She completes a circuit of the heavens in 27d 7h 43m 11s·5,
moving in an orbit whose excentricity is about 12,985 miles.
The moon is about four hundred times nearer to the earth than
the sun. The proximity of the moon to the earth keeps them
together. For so great is the attraction of the sun, that, if the
moon were farther from the earth, she would leave it altogether,
and would revolve as an independent planet about the sun.
The disturbing action (N. 101) of the sun on the moon is
equivalent to three forces. The first, acting in the direction of
the line joining the moon and earth, increases or diminishes her
gravity to the earth. The second, acting in the direction of a
35tangent to her orbit, disturbs her motion in longitude. And the
third, acting perpendicularly to the plane of her orbit, disturbs
her motion in latitude; that is, it brings her nearer to, or removes
her farther from, the plane of the ecliptic than she would otherwise
be. The periodic perturbations in the moon, arising from
these forces, are perfectly similar to the periodic perturbations of
the planets. But they are much greater and more numerous;
because the sun is so large, that many inequalities which are
quite insensible in the motions of the planets, are of great magnitude
in those of the moon. Among the innumerable periodic
inequalities to which the moon’s motion in longitude is liable,
the most remarkable are, the Equation of the Centre, which is the
difference between the moon’s mean and true longitude, the
Evection, the Variation, and the Annual Equation. The disturbing
force which acts in the line joining the moon and earth
produces the Evection: it diminishes the excentricity of the lunar
orbit in conjunction and opposition, thereby making it more
circular, and augments it in quadrature, which consequently
renders it more elliptical. The period of this inequality is less
than thirty-two days. Were the increase and diminution always
the same, the Evection would only depend upon the distance of
the moon from the sun; but its absolute value also varies with
her distance from the perigee (N. 102) of her orbit. Ancient
astronomers, who observed the moon solely with a view to the
prediction of eclipses, which can only happen in conjunction and
opposition, where the excentricity is diminished by the Evection,
assigned too small a value to the ellipticity of her orbit (N. 103).
The Evection was discovered by Ptolemy from observation, about
A.D. 140. The Variation produced by the tangential disturbing
force, which is at its maximum when the moon is 45° distant
from the sun, vanishes when that distance amounts to a quadrant,
and also when the moon is in conjunction and opposition; consequently,
that inequality never could have been discovered from
the eclipses: its period is half a lunar month (N. 104). The
Annual Equation depends upon the sun’s distance from the
earth: it arises from the moon’s motion being accelerated when
that of the earth is retarded, and vice versâ—for, when the earth
is in its perihelion, the lunar orbit is enlarged by the action of
the sun; therefore, the moon requires more time to perform
her revolution. But, as the earth approaches its aphelion, the
36moon’s orbit contracts, and less time is necessary to accomplish
her motion—its period, consequently, depends upon the time of
the year. In the eclipses the Annual Equation combines with the
Equation of the Centre of the terrestrial orbit, so that ancient
astronomers imagined the earth’s orbit to have a greater excentricity
than modern astronomers assign to it.
The planets disturb the motion of the moon both directly and
indirectly; their action on the earth alters its relative position
with regard to the sun and moon, and occasions inequalities in
the moon’s motion, which are more considerable than those
arising from their direct action; for the same reason the moon,
by disturbing the earth, indirectly disturbs her own motion.
Neither the excentricity of the lunar orbit, nor its mean inclination
to the plane of the ecliptic, have experienced any changes
from secular inequalities; for, although the mean action of the
sun on the moon depends upon the inclination of the lunar orbit
to the ecliptic, and the position of the ecliptic is subject to a
secular inequality, yet analysis shows that it does not occasion a
secular variation in the inclination of the lunar orbit, because the
action of the sun constantly brings the moon’s orbit to the same
inclination to the ecliptic. The mean motion, the nodes, and the
perigee, however, are subject to very remarkable variations.
From the eclipse observed at Babylon, on the 19th of March,
seven hundred and twenty-one years before the Christian era,
the place of the moon is known from that of the sun at the
instant of opposition (N. 83), whence her mean longitude may
be found. But the comparison of this mean longitude with
another mean longitude, computed back for the instant of the
eclipse from modern observations, shows that the moon performs
her revolution round the earth more rapidly and in a
shorter time now than she did formerly, and that the acceleration
in her mean motion has been increasing from age to age as
the square of the time (N. 105). All ancient and intermediate
eclipses confirm this result. As the mean motions of the planets
have no secular inequalities, this seemed to be an unaccountable
anomaly. It was at one time attributed to the resistance of an
ethereal medium pervading space, and at another to the successive
transmission of the gravitating force. But, as La Place
proved that neither of these causes, even if they exist, have any
influence on the motions of the lunar perigee (N. 102) or nodes,
37they could not affect the mean motion; a variation in the mean
motion from such causes being inseparably connected with variations
in the motions of the perigee and nodes. That great mathematician,
in studying the theory of Jupiter’s satellites, perceived
that the secular variation in the elements of Jupiter’s orbit, from
the action of the planets, occasions corresponding changes in the
motions of the satellites, which led him to suspect that the
acceleration in the mean motion of the moon might be connected
with the secular variation in the excentricity of the terrestrial
orbit. Analysis has shown that he assigned the true cause of the
acceleration.
It is proved that the greater the excentricity of the terrestrial
orbit, the greater is the disturbing action of the sun on the moon.
Now, as the excentricity has been decreasing for ages, the effect
of the sun in disturbing the moon has been diminishing during
that time. Consequently the attraction of the earth has had a
more and more powerful effect on the moon, and has been continually
diminishing the size of the lunar orbit. So that the
moon’s velocity has been gradually augmenting for many centuries
to balance the increase of the earth’s attraction. This
secular increase in the moon’s velocity is called the Acceleration,
a name peculiarly appropriate at present, and which will continue
to be so for a vast number of ages; because, as long as the earth’s
excentricity diminishes, the moon’s mean motion will be accelerated;
but when the excentricity has passed its minimum, and
begins to increase, the mean motion will be retarded from age to
age. The secular acceleration is now about 11ʺ·9, but its effect
on the moon’s place increases as the square of the time (N. 106).
It is remarkable that the action of the planets, thus reflected by
the sun to the moon, is much more sensible than their direct
action either on the earth or moon. The secular diminution in
the excentricity, which has not altered the equation of the centre
of the sun by eight minutes since the earliest recorded eclipses,
has produced a variation of about 1° 48ʹ in the moon’s longitude,
and of 7° 12ʹ in her mean anomaly (N. 107).
The action of the sun occasions a rapid but variable motion in
the nodes and perigee of the lunar orbit. Though the nodes
recede during the greater part of the moon’s revolution, and
advance during the smaller, they perform their sidereal revolution
in 6793d 9h 23m 9s·3, or about
186⁄10
years; and the
38perigee accomplishes a revolution, called of the moon’s apsides,
in 3232d 13h 48m 29s·6, or a little more than nine years, notwithstanding
its motion is sometimes retrograde and sometimes
direct: but such is the difference between the disturbing energy
of the sun and that of all the planets put together, that it
requires no less than 109,830 years for the greater axis of the
terrestrial orbit to do the same, moving at the rate of 11ʺ·8
annually. The form of the earth has no sensible effect either on
the lunar nodes or apsides. It is evident that the same secular
variation which changes the sun’s distance from the earth, and
occasions the acceleration in the moon’s mean motion, must affect
the nodes and perigee. It consequently appears, from theory as
well as observation, that both these elements are subject to a
secular inequality, arising from the variation in the excentricity
of the earth’s orbit, which connects them with the Acceleration,
so that both are retarded when the mean motion is anticipated.
The secular variations in these three elements are in the ratio of
the numbers 3, 0·735, and 1; whence the three motions of the
moon, with regard to the sun, to her perigee, and to her nodes,
are continually accelerated, and their secular equations are as the
numbers 1, 4·702, and 0·612. A comparison of ancient eclipses
observed by the Arabs, Greeks, and Chaldeans, imperfect as they
are, with modern observations, confirms these results of analysis.
Future ages will develop these great inequalities, which at some
most distant period will amount to many circumferences (N. 108).
They are, indeed, periodic; but who shall tell their period? Millions
of years must elapse before that great cycle is accomplished.
The moon is so near, that the excess of matter at the earth’s
equator occasions periodic variations in her longitude, and also
that remarkable inequality in her latitude, already mentioned as
a nutation in the lunar orbit, which diminishes its inclination to
the ecliptic when the moon’s ascending node coincides with the
equinox of spring, and augments it when that node coincides
with the equinox of autumn. As the cause must be proportional
to the effect, a comparison of these inequalities, computed from
theory, with the same given by observation, shows that the compression
of the terrestrial spheroid, or the ratio of the difference
between the polar and the equatorial diameters, to the diameter
of the equator, is
1⁄305·05.
It is proved analytically, that, if a fluid
mass of homogeneous matter, whose particles attract each other
39inversely as the squares of the distance, were to revolve about an
axis as the earth does, it would assume the form of a spheroid
whose compression is
1⁄230.
Since that is not the case, the earth
cannot be homogeneous, but must decrease in density from its
centre to its circumference. Thus the moon’s eclipses show the
earth to be round; and her inequalities not only determine the
form, but even the internal structure of our planet; results of
analysis which could not have been anticipated. Similar inequalities
in the motions of Jupiter’s satellites prove that his
mass is not homogeneous, and that his compression is
1⁄13·8.
His
equatorial diameter exceeds his polar diameter by about 6000 miles.
The phases (N. 109) of the moon, which vary from a slender
silvery crescent soon after conjunction, to a complete circular disc
of light in opposition, decrease by the same degrees till the moon
is again enveloped in the morning beams of the sun. These
changes regulate the returns of the eclipses. Those of the sun
can only happen in conjunction, when the moon, coming between
the earth and the sun, intercepts his light. Those of the moon
are occasioned by the earth intervening between the sun and
moon when in opposition. As the earth is opaque and nearly
spherical, it throws a conical shadow on the side of the moon
opposite to the sun, the axis of which passes through the centres
of the sun and earth (N. 110). The length of the shadow terminates
at the point where the apparent diameters (N. 111) of the
sun and earth would be the same. When the moon is in opposition,
and at her mean distance, the diameter of the sun would
be seen from her centre under an angle of 1918ʺ·1. That of the
earth would appear under an angle of 6908ʺ·3. So that the
length of the shadow is at least three times and a half greater
than the distance of the moon from the earth, and the breadth of
the shadow, where it is traversed by the moon, is about eight-thirds
of the lunar diameter. Hence the moon would be eclipsed
every time she is in opposition, were it not for the inclination of
her orbit to the plane of the ecliptic, in consequence of which the
moon, when in opposition, is either above or below the cone of
the earth’s shadow, except when in or near her nodes. Her position
with regard to them occasions all the varieties in the lunar
eclipses. Every point of the moon’s surface successively loses
the light of different parts of the sun’s disc before being eclipsed.
Her brightness therefore gradually diminishes before she plunges
40into the earth’s shadow. The breadth of the space occupied by
the penumbra (N. 112) is equal to the apparent diameter of the
sun, as seen from the centre of the moon. The mean duration
of a revolution of the sun, with regard to the node of the lunar
orbit, is to the duration of a synodic revolution (N. 113) of the
moon as 223 to 19. So that, after a period of 223 lunar months,
the sun and moon would return to the same relative position with
regard to the node of the moon’s orbit, and therefore the eclipses
would recur in the same order were not the periods altered by
irregularities in the motions of the sun and moon. In lunar
eclipses, our atmosphere bends the sun’s rays which pass through
it all round into the cone of the earth’s shadow. And as the
horizontal refraction (N. 114) or bending of the rays surpasses
half the sum of the semidiameters of the sun and moon, divided
by their mutual distance, the centre of the lunar disc, supposed
to be in the axis of the shadow, would receive the rays from the
same point of the sun, round all sides of the earth; so that it
would be more illuminated than in full moon, if the greater portion
of the light were not stopped or absorbed by the atmosphere.
Instances are recorded where this feeble light has been entirely
absorbed, so that the moon has altogether disappeared in her
eclipses.
The sun is eclipsed when the moon intercepts his rays
(N. 115). The moon, though incomparably smaller than the sun, is
so much nearer the earth, that her apparent diameter differs but
little from his, but both are liable to such variations that they
alternately surpass one another. Were the eye of a spectator
in the same straight line with the centres of the sun and
moon, he would see the sun eclipsed. If the apparent diameter
of the moon surpassed that of the sun, the eclipse would be
total. If it were less, the observer would see a ring of light
round the disc of the moon, and the eclipse would be annular,
as it was on the 17th of May, 1836, and on the 15th of March,
1858. If the centre of the moon should not be in the straight
line joining the centres of the sun and the eye of the observer,
the moon might only eclipse a part of the sun. The
variation, therefore, in the distances of the sun and moon from
the centre of the earth, and of the moon from her node at the
instant of conjunction, occasions great varieties in the solar
eclipses. Besides, the height of the moon above the horizon
41changes her apparent diameter, and may augment or diminish
the apparent distances of the centres of the sun and moon, so that
an eclipse of the sun may occur to the inhabitants of one country,
and not to those of another. In this respect the solar eclipses
differ from the lunar, which are the same for every part of the
earth where the moon is above the horizon. In solar eclipses,
the light reflected by the atmosphere diminishes the obscurity
they produce. Even in total eclipses the higher part of the
atmosphere is enlightened by a part of the sun’s disc, and reflects
its rays to the earth. The whole disc of the new moon is frequently
visible from atmospheric reflection. During the eclipse
of the 19th of March, 1849, the spots on the lunar disc were distinctly
visible, and during that of 1856 the moon was like a
beautiful rose-coloured ball floating in the ether: the colour is
owing to the refraction of the sun’s light passing through the
earth’s atmosphere.
In total solar eclipses the slender luminous arc that is visible
for a few seconds before the sun vanishes and also before he reappears,
resembles a string of pearls surrounding the dark edge of
the moon; it is occasioned by the sun’s rays passing between the
tops of the lunar mountains: it occurs likewise in annular eclipses.
A phenomenon altogether unprecedented was seen during the
total eclipse of the sun which happened on the 8th of July, 1842.
The moon was like a black patch on the sky surrounded by a faint
whitish light or corona about the eighth of the moon’s diameter
in breadth, which is supposed to be the solar atmosphere rendered
visible by the intervention of the moon. In this whitish
corona there appeared three rose-coloured flames like the teeth of
a saw. Similar flames were also seen in the white corona of
the total eclipse which took place in 1851, and a long rose-coloured
chain of what appeared to be jagged mountains or sierras
united at the base by a red band seemed to be raised into the
corona by mirage; but there is no doubt that the corona and red
phenomena belong to the sun. This red chain was so bright
that Mr. Airy saw it illuminate the northern horizon through an
azimuth of 90° with red light. M. Faye attributes the rose-coloured
protuberances to the constitution of the sun, which, like
Sir William Herschel, he conceives to be an incandescent globe,
consisting of two concentric parts of very unequal density, the
internal part being a dark spherical mass, the external a very
42extensive atmosphere, at a certain height in which there is a
stratum of luminous clouds which constitutes the photosphere of
the sun; above this rises his real atmosphere, so rare as to be
only visible as a white aureola or corona during total and annular
eclipses. M. Faye conceives that from the central mass gaseous
eruptions issue, which form the spots by dissipating and partly
extinguishing the luminous clouds, and then rising into the rare
atmosphere above that they appear as rose-coloured protuberances
during annular eclipses. He estimates that the volume of these
vapours sometimes surpasses that of the earth a thousand or even
two thousand times. Sir William Herschel attributed the spots
to occasional openings in the luminous coating, which seems to
be always in motion; but whatever the cause of the spots may
be, it is certainly periodical. The white corona and beads were
seen during the eclipse of the 15th March, 1858, but there were
no rose-coloured appearances, in England at least; but the sky
was clouded, so that the eclipse was only visible at intervals.
Planets sometimes eclipse one another. On the 17th of May,
1737, Mercury was eclipsed by Venus near their inferior conjunction;
Mars passed over Jupiter on the 9th of January,
1591; and on the 30th of October, 1825, the moon eclipsed
Saturn. These phenomena, however, happen very seldom,
because all the planets, or even a part of them, are very rarely
seen in conjunction at once; that is, in the same part of the
heavens at the same time. More than 2500 years before our
era the five great planets were in conjunction. On the 15th of
September, 1186, a similar assemblage took place between the
constellations of Virgo and Libra; and in 1801 the Moon,
Jupiter, Saturn, and Venus were united in the heart of the Lion.
These conjunctions are so rare, that Lalande has computed that
more than seventeen millions of millions of years separate the
epochs of the contemporaneous conjunctions of the six great
planets.
The motions of the moon have now become of more importance
to the navigator and geographer than those of any other heavenly
body, from the precision with which terrestrial longitude is
determined by occultations of stars, and by lunar distances. In
consequence of the retrograde motion of the nodes of the lunar
orbit, at the rate of 3ʹ 10ʺ·64 daily, these points make a tour of
the heavens in a little more than eighteen years and a half.
43This causes the moon to move round the earth in a kind of
spiral, so that her disc at different times passes over every point
in a zone of the heavens extending rather more than 5° 9ʹ on
each side of the ecliptic. It is therefore evident that at one time
or other she must eclipse every star and planet she meets with in
this space. Therefore the occultation of a star by the moon is a
phenomenon of frequent occurrence. The moon seems to pass
over the star, which almost instantaneously vanishes at one side
of her disc, and after a short time as suddenly reappears on the
other. A lunar distance is the observed distance of the moon
from the sun, or from a particular star or planet, at any instant.
The lunar theory is brought to such perfection, that the times of
these phenomena, observed under any meridian, when compared
with those computed for that of Greenwich, and given in the
Nautical Almanac, furnish the longitude of the observer within a
few miles (N. 95.)
From the lunar theory, the mean distance of the sun from the
earth, and thence the whole dimensions of the solar system, are
known; for the forces which retain the earth and moon in their
orbits are respectively proportional to the radii vectores of the
earth and moon, each being divided by the square of its periodic
time. And, as the lunar theory gives the ratio of the forces, the
ratio of the distances of the sun and moon from the earth is
obtained. Hence it appears that the sun’s mean distance from
the earth is 399·7 or nearly 400 times greater than that of the
moon. The method of finding the absolute distances of the
celestial bodies, in miles, is in fact the same with that employed
in measuring the distances of terrestrial objects. From the extremities
of a known base (N. 116), the angles which the visual
rays from the object form with it are measured; their sum subtracted
from two right angles gives the angle opposite the base;
therefore, by trigonometry, all the angles and sides of the triangle
may be computed—consequently the distance of the object is
found. The angle under which the base of the triangle is seen
from the object is the parallax of that object. It evidently increases
and decreases with the distance. Therefore the base must
be very great indeed to be visible from the celestial bodies. The
globe itself, whose dimensions are obtained by actual admeasurement,
furnishes a standard of measures with which we compare the
distances, masses, densities, and volumes of the sun and planets.</div></body></text></TEI>