<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="25">
203
SECTION XXIV.

Chemical or Photographic Rays of Solar Spectrum—Scheele, Ritter, and
Wollaston’s Discoveries—Wedgwood’s and Sir Humphry Davy’s Photographic
Pictures—The Calotype—The Daguerreotype—The Chromatype—The
Cyanotype—Collodion—Sir John Herschel’s Discoveries in
the Chemical Spectrum—M. Becquerel’s Discoveries of Inactive Lines in
ditto—Thermic Spectrum—Phosphoric Spectrum—Electrical Properties—Parathermic
Rays—Moser and Hunt’s Experiments—General
Structure and antagonist Properties of Solar Spectrum—Defracted
Spectrum.
The Solar Spectrum exercises an energetic action on matter,
producing the most wonderful and mysterious changes on the
organised and unorganised creation.
All bodies are probably affected by light, but it acts with
greatest energy on such as are of weak chemical affinity, imparting
properties to them which they did not possess before. Collodion
and metallic salts, especially those of silver, whose molecules
are held together by an unstable equilibrium, are of all bodies the
most susceptible of its influence; the effects, however, vary with
the substances employed, and with the different rays of the
solar spectrum, the chemical properties of which are by no
means alike. As early as 1772 M. Scheele showed that the
pure white colour of chloride of silver was rapidly darkened by
the blue rays of the solar spectrum, while the red rays had no
effect upon it: and in 1801 M. Ritter discovered that invisible
rays beyond the violet extremity have the property of blackening
argentine salts, that this property diminishes towards the
less refrangible part of the spectrum, and that the red rays have
an opposite quality, that of restoring the blackened salt of silver
to its original purity; from which he inferred that the most
refrangible extremity of the spectrum has an oxygenising power,
and the other that of deoxygenating. Dr. Wollaston found that
gum guaiacum acquires a green colour in the violet and blue
rays, and resumes its original tint in the red. No attempt had
been made to trace natural objects by means of light reflected
from them, till Mr. Wedgwood, together with Sir Humphry
204Davy, took up the subject: they produced profiles and tracings
of objects on surfaces prepared with nitrate and chloride of silver,
but they did not succeed in rendering their pictures permanent.
This difficulty was overcome in 1814 by M. Niepcé, who produced
a permanent picture of surrounding objects by placing
in the focus of a camera-obscura a metallic plate covered with
a film of asphalt dissolved in oil of lavender.
Mr. Fox Talbot, without any knowledge of M. Niepcé’s experiments,
had been engaged in the same pursuit, and must be
regarded as an independent inventor of photography, one of the
most beautiful arts of modern times: he was the first who succeeded
in using paper chemically prepared for receiving impressions
from natural objects; and he also discovered a method of
fixing permanently the impressions—that is, of rendering the
paper insensible to any further action of light. In the calotype,
one of Mr. Talbot’s applications of the art, the photographic
surface is prepared by washing smooth writing-paper, first with
a solution of nitrate of silver, then with bromide of potassium,
and again with nitrate of silver, drying it at a fire after each
washing; the paper is thus rendered so sensitive to light that
even the passage of a thin cloud is perceptible on it, consequently
it must be prepared by candle-light. Portraits, buildings,
insects, leaves of plants—in short, every object is accurately
delineated in a few seconds; and in the focus of a camera-obscura
the most minute objects are so exactly depicted that the microscope
reveals new beauties.
Since the effect of the chemical agency of light is to destroy
the affinity between the salt and the silver, Mr. Talbot found
that, in order to render these impressions permanent on paper,
it was only necessary to wash it with salt and water, or with
a solution of iodide of potassium. For these liquids the liquid
hyposulphites have been advantageously substituted, which are
the most efficacious in dissolving and removing the unchanged
salt, leaving the reduced silver on the paper. The calotype
picture is negative, that is, the lights and shadows are the reverse
of what they are in nature, and the right-hand side in nature
is the left in the picture; but if it be placed with its face pressed
against photographic paper, between a board and a plate of glass,
and exposed to the sun a short time, a positive and direct picture,
as it is in nature, is formed: engravings may be exactly copied
205by this simple process, and a direct picture may be produced at
once by using photographic paper already made brown by exposure
to light.
While Mr. Fox Talbot was engaged in these very elegant
discoveries in England, M. Daguerre had brought to perfection
and made public that admirable process by which he has compelled
Nature permanently to engrave her own works; and thus
the talents of France and England have been combined in bringing
to perfection this useful art. Copper, plated with silver,
was successfully employed by M. Daguerre for copying nature
by the agency of light. The surface of the plate is converted
into an iodide of silver, by placing it horizontally with its face
downwards in a covered box, in the bottom of which there is a
small quantity of iodine which evaporates spontaneously. In
three or four minutes the surface acquires a yellow tint, and
then, screening it carefully from light, it must be placed in the
focus of a camera obscura, where an invisible image of external
objects will be impressed on it in a few minutes. When taken
out, the plate must be exposed in another box to the action of
mercurial vapour, which attaches itself to those parts of the
plate which had been exposed to light, but does not adhere to
such parts as had been in shadow; and as the quantity of
mercury over the other parts is in exact proportion to the
degree of illumination, the shading of the picture is perfect.
The image is fixed, first by removing the iodine from the plate
by plunging it into hyposulphite of soda, and then washing it
in distilled water; by this process the yellow colour is destroyed,
and in order to render the mercury permanent, the plate must
be exposed a few minutes to nitric vapour, then placed in nitric
acid containing copper or silver in solution at a temperature of
611⁄4°
of Fahrenheit for a short time, and lastly polished with
chalk. This final part of the process is due to Dr. Berre, of
Vienna.
Nothing can be more beautiful than the shading of these chiaroscuro
pictures when objects are at rest, but the least motion
destroys the effect; the method therefore is more applicable to
buildings than landscape. Colour is wanting; but the researches
of Sir John Herschel give reason to believe that even this will
ultimately be attained.
The most perfect impressions of seaweeds, leaves of plants,
206feathers, &c., may be formed by bringing the object into close
contact with a sheet of photographic paper, between a board and
plate of glass; then exposing the whole to the sun for a short time,
and afterwards fixing it by the process described. The colours
of the pictures vary with the preparation of the paper, by which
almost any tint may be produced.
In the chromatype, a peculiar photograph discovered by Mr.
Hunt, chromate of copper is used, on which a dark brown negative
image is first formed, but by the continued action of light it is
changed to a positive yellow picture on a white ground; the
farther effect of light is checked by washing the picture in pure
water.
In cyanotypes, a class of photographs discovered by Sir John
Herschel, in which cyanogen in its combinations with iron forms
the ground, the pictures are Prussian blue and white. In the
chrysotype of the same eminent philosopher, the image is first
received on paper prepared with the ammonia-citrate of iron, and
afterwards washed with a neutral solution of gold. It is fixed
by water acidulated with sulphuric acid, and lastly by hydriodate
of potash, from which a white and purple photograph results.
It is vain to attempt to describe the various beautiful effects
which Sir John Herschel obtained from chemical compounds, and
from the juices of plants; the juice of the red poppy gives a
positive bluish purple image, that of the ten-week stock a fine
rose colour on a pale straw-coloured ground.
Pictures may be made by exposure to sunshine, on all compound
substances having a weak chemical affinity; but the
image is often invisible, as in the Daguerreotype, till brought out
by washing in some chemical preparation. Water is frequently
sufficient; indeed Sir John Herschel brought out dormant photographs
by breathing on them, and some substances are insensible
to the action of light till moistened, as for example, gum
guaiacum. Argentine papers, however, are little subject to the
influence of moisture. The power of the solar rays is augmented
in certain cases by placing a plate of glass in close contact over
the sensitive surface.
All these various experiments, though highly interesting, have
now been superseded. It was found that paper did not always
answer for photography, on account of imperfections in its
structure; silver plates were too expensive; and glass was
207found to be unimpressable. Nevertheless, M. Niepcé de Victor
obtained beautiful results upon glass coated with albumen mixed
with sensitive substances, which suggested the medium by means
of which the art has been brought to its present perfection, and
that final step is due to Mr. Scott Archer. He coated a plate
of glass thinly with collodion, that is, gun-cotton dissolved in
ether and alcohol, which dries into a delicate transparent film
of extreme adhesiveness, and of such intense sensibility that the
action of light upon it is so instantaneous that it arrests a stormy
sea or a fleeting cloud before they have time to change. Now
landscapes in chiaroscuro are produced of great beauty, which
by the slower methods were mere masses of deep shade and
broad light. Architecture is even more perfectly obtained,
but it fails to give a pleasing representation of the human
countenance.
Chemical action always accompanies the sun’s light, but the
analysis of the solar spectrum has partly disclosed the wonderful
nature of the emanation. In the research, properties most important
and unexpected have been discovered by Sir John
Herschel, who imprints the stamp of genius on all he touches—his
eloquent papers can alone convey an adequate idea of their
value in opening a field of inquiry vast and untrodden. The
following brief and imperfect account of his experiments is all
that can be attempted here:—
A certain degree of chemical energy is distributed through
every part of the solar spectrum, and also to a considerable
extent through the dark spaces at each extremity. This distribution
does not depend on the refrangibility of the rays
alone, but also on the nature of the rays themselves, and on
the physical properties of the analyzing medium on which the
rays are received, whose changes indicate and measure their
action. The length of the photographic image of the same solar
spectrum varies with the physical qualities of the surface on
which it is impressed. When the solar spectrum is received on
paper prepared with bromide of silver, the chemical spectrum,
as indicated merely by the length of the darkened part, includes
within its limits the whole luminous spectrum, extending in
one direction far beyond the extreme violet and lavender rays,
and in the other down to the extremest red: with tartrate of
silver the darkening occupies not only all the space under the
208most refrangible rays, but reaches much beyond the extreme red.
On paper prepared with formobenzoate of silver the chemical
spectrum is cut off at the orange rays, with phosphate of silver
in the yellow, and with chloride of gold it terminates with the
green, with carbonate of mercury it ends in the blue, and on
paper prepared with the percyanide of gold, ammonia, and
nitrate of silver, the darkening lies entirely beyond the visible
spectrum at its most refrangible extremity, and is only half its
length, whereas in some cases chemical action occupies a space
more than twice the length of the luminous image.
The point of maximum energy of chemical action varies as
much for different preparations as the scale of action. In the
greater number of cases the point of deepest blackening lies
about the lower edge of the indigo rays, though in no two cases
is it exactly the same, and in many substances it is widely
different. On paper prepared with the juice of the ten-week
stock (Mathiola annua) there are two maxima, one in the mean
yellow and a weaker in the violet; and on a preparation of
tartrate of silver Sir John Herschel found three, one in the least
refrangible blue, one in the indigo, and a third beyond the visible
violet. The decrease in photographic energy is seldom perfectly
alike on both sides of the maximum. Thus at the most refrangible
end of the solar spectrum the greatest chemical power
is exerted in most instances where there is least light and heat,
and even in the space where both sensibly cease.
Not only the intensity but the kind of action is different in
the different points of the solar spectrum, as evidently appears
from the various colours that are frequently impressed on the
same analyzing surface, each ray having a tendency to impart
its own colour. Sir John Herschel obtained a coloured image
of the solar spectrum on paper prepared according to Mr. Talbot’s
principle, from a sunbeam refracted by a glass prism and then
highly condensed by a lens. The photographic image was
rapidly formed and very intense, and, when withdrawn from
the spectrum and viewed in common daylight, it was found to
be coloured with sombre but unequivocal tints imitating the
prismatic colours, which varied gradually from red through
green and blue to a purplish black. After washing the surface
in water, the tints became more decided by being kept a few
days in the dark—a phenomenon, Sir John observes, of constant
209occurrence, whatever be the preparation of the paper, provided
colours are produced at all. He also obtained a coloured image
on nitrate of silver, the part under the blue rays becoming a blue
brown, while that under the violet had a pinkish shade, and
sometimes green appeared at the point corresponding to the least
refrangible blue. Mr. Hunt found on a paper prepared with
fluoride of silver that a yellow line was impressed on the space
occupied by the yellow rays, a green band on the space under
the green rays, an intense blue throughout the space on which
the blue and indigo rays fell, and under the violet rays a ruddy
brown appeared; these colours remained clear and distinct after
being kept two months.
Notwithstanding the great variety in the scale of action of
the solar spectrum, the darkening or deoxydizing principle that
prevails in the more refrangible part rarely surpasses or even
attains the mean yellow ray which is the point of maximum
illumination; it is generally cut off abruptly at that point
which seems to form a limit between the opposing powers which
prevail at the two ends of the spectrum. The bleaching or
oxydizing effect of the red rays on blackened muriate of silver
discovered by M. Ritter of Jena, and the restoration by the
same rays of discoloured gum guaiacum to its original tint by Dr.
Wollaston, have already been mentioned as giving the first indications
of that difference in the mode of action of the chemical rays at
the two ends of the visible spectrum, now placed beyond a doubt.
The action exerted by the less refrangible rays beyond and
at the red extremity of the solar spectrum, in most instances,
so far from blackening metallic salts, protects them from the
action of the diffused daylight: but, if the prepared surface has
already been blackened by exposure to the sun, they possess the
remarkable property of bleaching it in some cases, and under
other circumstances of changing the black surface into a fiery red.
Sir John Herschel, to whom we owe most of our knowledge
of the properties of the chemical spectrum, prepared a sheet of
paper by washing it with muriate of ammonia, and then with
two coats of nitrate of silver; on this surface he obtained an
impression of the solar spectrum exhibiting a range of colours
very nearly corresponding with its natural hues. But a very
remarkable phenomenon occurred at the end of least refrangibility;
the red rays exerted a protecting influence which preserved
210the paper from the change which it would otherwise have
undergone from the deoxydizing influence of the dispersed light
which always surrounds the solar spectrum, and this maintained
its whiteness. Sir John met with another instance on paper
prepared with bromide of silver, on which the whole of the space
occupied by the visible spectrum was darkened down to the very
extremity of the red rays, but an oxydizing action commenced
beyond the extreme red, which maintained the whiteness of the
paper to a considerable distance beyond the last traceable limit
of the visible rays, thus evincing decidedly the existence of
some chemical power over a considerable space beyond the least
refrangible end of the spectrum. Mr. Hunt also found that on
the Daguerreotype plate a powerful protecting influence is exercised
by the extreme red rays. In these cases the red and those
dark rays beyond them exert an action of an opposite nature to
that of the violet and lavender rays.
The least refrangible part of the solar spectrum possesses also,
under certain circumstances, a bleaching property, by which the
metallic salts are restored to their original whiteness after being
blackened by exposure to common daylight, or to the most
refrangible rays of the solar spectrum.
Paper prepared with iodide of silver, when washed over with
ferrocyanite of potash, blackens rapidly when exposed to the
solar spectrum. It begins in the violet rays and extends over
all the space occupied by the dark chemical rays, and over the
whole visible spectrum down to the extreme red rays. This
image is coloured, the red rays giving a reddish tint and the
blue a blueish. In a short time a bleaching process begins
under the red rays, and extends upwards to the green, but the
space occupied by the extreme red is maintained perfectly dark.
Mr. Hunt found that a similar bleaching power is exerted by
the red rays on paper prepared with protocyanide of potassium
and gold with a wash of nitrate of silver.
The application of a moderately strong hydriodate of potash
to darkened photographic paper renders it peculiarly susceptible
of being whitened by further exposure to light. If paper prepared
with bromide of silver be washed with ferrocyanate of
potash while under the influence of the solar spectrum, it is
immediately darkened throughout the part exposed to the visible
rays down to the end of the red, some slight interference being
211perceptible about the region of the orange and yellow. After
this a bleaching action begins over the part occupied by the red
rays, which extends to the green. By longer exposure an oval
spot begins again to darken about the centre of the bleached
space; but, if the paper receive another wash of the hydriodate
of potash, the bleaching action extends up from the green, over
the region occupied by the most refrangible rays and considerably
beyond them, thus inducing a negative action in the most
refrangible part of the spectrum.
In certain circumstances the red rays, instead of restoring
darkened photographic paper to its original whiteness, produce
a deep red colour. When Sir John Herschel received the spectrum
on paper somewhat discoloured by exposure to direct
sunshine, instead of whiteness, a red border was formed extending
from the space occupied by the orange, and nearly covering
that on which the red fell. When, instead of exposing the
paper in the first instance to direct sunshine, it was blackened
by the violet rays of a prismatic spectrum, or by a sunbeam that
had undergone the absorptive action of a solution of ammonia-sulphate
of copper, the red rays of the condensed spectrum produced
on it, not whiteness, but a full and fiery red, which
occupied the whole space on which any of the visible red rays
had fallen; and this red remained unchanged, however long the
paper remained exposed to the least refrangible rays.
Sunlight transmitted through red glass produces the same
effect as the red rays of the spectrum in the foregoing experiment.
Sir John Herschel placed an engraving over a paper
blackened by exposure to sunshine, covering the whole with a
dark red-brown glass previously ascertained to absorb every ray
beyond the orange: in this way a photographic copy was obtained
in which the shades were black, as in the original
engraving; but the lights, instead of being white, were of the
red colour of venous blood, and no other colour could be obtained
by exposure to light, however long. Sir John ascertained that
every part of the spectrum impressed by the more refrangible
rays is equally reddened, or nearly so, by the subsequent action
of the less refrangible; thus the red rays have the very remarkable
property of assimilating to their own colour the blackness
already impressed on photographic paper.
That there is a deoxydating property in the more refrangible
212rays, and an oxydating action in the less refrangible part of the
spectrum, is manifest from the blackening of one and the
bleaching effect of the other; but the peculiar action of the red
rays in the experiments mentioned shows that some other principle
exists different from contrariety of action. These opposite
qualities are balanced or neutralized in the region of the mean
yellow ray. But, although this is the general character of the
photographic spectrum, under certain circumstances even the red
rays have a deoxydating power, while the blue and violet exert
a contrary influence; but these are rare exceptions.
The photographic action of the two portions of the solar spectrum
being so different, Sir John Herschel tried the effect of
their united action by superposing the less refrangible part of
the spectrum over the more refrangible portion by means of two
prisms; and he thus discovered that two rays of different refrangibility,
and therefore of different lengths of undulation, acting
simultaneously, produce an effect which neither, acting separately,
can do.
Some circumstances that occurred during the analysis of the
chemical spectrum seem to indicate an absorptive action in the
sun’s atmosphere. The spectral image impressed on paper prepared
with nitrate of silver and Rochelle salt commenced at, or
very little below, the mean yellow ray, of a delicate lead colour;
and when the action was arrested, such was the character of the
whole photographic spectrum. But, when the light of the solar
spectrum was allowed to continue its action, there was observed
to come on suddenly a new and much more intense impression of
darkness, confined in length to the blue and violet rays; and,
what is most remarkable, confined also in breadth to the middle
of the sun’s image, so far at least as to leave a border of the
lead-coloured spectrum traceable, not only round the clear and
well-defined convexity of the dark interior spectrum at the less
refrangible end, but also laterally along both its edges; and this
border was the more easily traced, and less liable to be mistaken,
from its striking contrast of colour with the interior spectrum,
the former being lead gray, the latter an extremely rich deep
velvety brown. The less refrangible end of this interior brown
spectrum presented a sharply terminated and regularly elliptical
contour, the more refrangible a less decided one. “It may
seem too hazardous,” Sir John continues, “to look for the cause
213of this very singular phenomenon in a real difference between the
chemical agencies of those rays which issue from the central portion
of the sun’s disc, and those which, emanating from its
borders, have undergone the absorptive action of a much greater
depth of its atmosphere; and yet I confess myself somewhat at
a loss what other cause to assign for it. It must suffice, however,
to have thrown out the hint, remarking only, that I have other,
and I am disposed to think decisive, evidence of the existence of
an absorptive solar atmosphere extending beyond the luminous
one.” M. Arago observed that the rays from the centre of the
sun have a greater photographic power than those from the edges,
and the photographic images of the sun, taken on glass by M.
Niepcé, were blood-red, much deeper in the centre, and on one
occasion the image was surrounded by an auriol. Several circumstances
concur in showing that there are influences also
concerned in the transmission of the photographic action which
have not yet been explained, as, for example, the influence which
the time of the day exercises on the rapidity with which photographic
impressions are made, the sun being much less effective
two hours after passing the meridian than two hours before.
There is also reason to suspect that the effect in some way depends
on the latitude, since a much longer time is required to obtain an
image under the bright skies of the tropics than in England; and
it is even probable that there is a difference in the sun’s light
in high and low latitudes, because an image of the solar spectrum,
obtained on a Daguerreotype plate in Virginia, by Dr.
Draper, differed from a spectral image obtained by Mr. Hunt on
a similar plate in England. The inactive spaces discovered in
the photographic spectrum by M. E. Becquerel, similar to those
in the luminous spectrum, and coinciding with them, is also a
phenomenon of which no explanation has yet been given; possibly
the chemical rays may be absorbed by the atmosphere with
those of light. Although chemical action extends over the whole
luminous spectrum, and much beyond it, in gradations of more
or less intensity, it is found by careful investigation to be by no
means continuous; numerous inactive lines cross it, coinciding
with those in the luminous image as far as it extends; besides, a
very great number exist in the portions that are obscure, and
which overlap the visible part. There are three extraspectral
lines beyond the red, and some strongly marked groups on the
214obscure part beyond the violet; but the whole number of those
inactive lines, especially in the dark spaces, is so great that it is
impossible to count them.
Notwithstanding this coincidence in the inactive lines of the
two spectra, photographic energy is independent of both light and
heat, since it exerts the most powerful influence in those rays
where they are least, and also in spaces where neither sensibly
exist; but the transmission of the sun’s light through coloured
media makes that independence quite evident. Heat and light
pass abundantly through yellow glass, or a solution of chromate
of potash; but the greater part of the chemical rays are excluded,
and chlorine gas diluted with common air, though highly pervious
to the luminous and calorific principles, has the same effect. Sir
John Herschel found that a slight degree of yellow London fog
had a similar effect with that of pale yellow media: he also remarked
that a weak solution of azolitmine in potash, which
admits a great quantity of green light, excludes chemical action;
and some years ago the author, while making experiments on the
transmission of chemical rays, observed that green glass, coloured
by oxide of copper about the 20th of an inch thick, excludes the
photographic rays; and, as M. Melloni has shown that substance
to be impervious to the most refrangible calorific rays, it has the
property of excluding the whole of the most refrangible part of
the solar spectrum, visible and invisible. Green mica, if not too
thin, has also the same effect, whereas amethyst, deep blue, and
violet-coloured glasses, though they transmit a very little light,
allow the chemical rays to pass freely. Thus light and photographic
energy may be regarded as distinct parts of the solar
beam, and both being propagated by vibrations of the etherial
medium they are merely motion. Excellent images have been
obtained of the moon in its different phases by Professor Secchi,
at Rome; candlelight is nearly deficient of the chemical rays.
How far they may influence crystallization and other molecular
arrangements is unknown, but their power is universal wherever
the solar beam falls, although their effect only becomes evident
in cases of unstable molecular equilibrium.
It is not by vision alone that a knowledge of the sun’s rays is
acquired: touch proves that they have the power of raising the
temperature of substances exposed to their action. Sir William
Herschel discovered that rays which produce the sensation of heat
215exist in the solar spectrum independent of those of light; when
he used a prism of flint glass, he found that the warm rays are
most abundant in the dark space a little beyond the red extremity
of the spectrum, that from thence they decrease towards the
violet, beyond which they are insensible. It may be concluded
therefore, that the calorific rays vary in refrangibility, and that
those beyond the extreme red are less refrangible than any rays
of light. Since Sir William Herschel’s time it has been discovered
that the calorific spectrum exceeds the luminous one in
length in the ratio of 42 to 25, but the most singular phenomenon
is its want of continuity. Sir John Herschel blackened the
under side of a sheet of very thin white paper by the smoke of a
lamp, and, having exposed the white side to the solar spectrum,
he drew a brush dipped in spirit of wine over it, by which the
paper assumed a black hue when sufficiently saturated. The
heat in the spectrum evaporated the spirit first on those parts of
the paper where it fell with greatest intensity, thereby restoring
their white colour, and he thus discovered that the heat increases
uniformly and gradually throughout the luminous spectrum, and
that it comes to a maximum and forms a spot at a considerable
distance beyond the extreme red. It then decreases, but again
increasing it forms a second maximum spot, after which it ceases
altogether through a short space, but is again renewed and forms
two more insulated spots, and even a fifth may be traced at a
little distance from the latter. These circumstances are probably
owing to the absorbing action of the atmospheres of the sun and
earth. “The effect of the former,” says Sir John, “is beyond our
control, unless we could carry our experiments to such a point of
delicacy as to operate separately on rays emanating from the
centre and borders of the sun’s disc; that of the earth’s, though
it cannot be eliminated any more than in the case of the sun’s,
may yet be varied to a considerable extent by experiments made
at great elevations, under a vertical sun, and compared with
others where the sun is more oblique, the situation lower, and
the atmospheric pressure of a temporarily high amount. Should
it be found that this cause is in reality concerned in the production
of the spots, we should see reason to believe that a large
portion of solar heat never reaches the earth’s surface, and that
what is incident on the summits of lofty mountains differs not
only in quantity but also in quality from what the plains receive.”
216A remarkable phosphorescent property was discovered by M. E.
Becquerel in the solar spectrum. Two luminous bands separated
by a dark one are excited by the solar spectrum on paper covered
with a solution of gum arabic, and strewed with powdered sulphuret
of calcium or Canton’s phosphorus. One of the luminous
bands occupies the space under the least refrangible violet rays,
and the other that beyond the lavender rays, so that the dark
band lies under the extreme violet and lavender rays. When the
action of the light is continued, the whole surface beyond the
least refrangible violet shines, the luminous bands already mentioned
brightest; but all the space from the least refrangible
violet to the extreme red remains dark. If the surface, prepared
either with the sulphuret of calcium or Bologna stone, be exposed
to the sun’s light for a little time, it becomes luminous all over;
but when, in this state, a solar spectrum is thrown upon it, the
whole remains luminous except the part from the least refrangible
violet to the extreme red, on which space the light is extinguished;
and when the temperature of the surface is raised by a lamp, the
bright parts become more luminous and the dark parts remain
dark. Glass stained by the protoxide of copper, which transmits only
the red and orange rays, has the same effect with the less refrangible
part of the spectrum; hence there can be no doubt that the most refrangible
and obscure rays of the spectrum excite phosphorescence,
while all the less refrangible rays of light and heat extinguish it.
Paper prepared with the sulphuret of barium, when under the
solar spectrum, shows only one space of maximum luminous intensity,
and the destroying rays are the same as in the sulphuret
of calcium. Thus the obscure rays beyond the extreme violet
produce light, while the luminous rays extinguish it.
The phosphoric spectrum has inactive lines which coincide with
those in the luminous and chemical spectra, at least as far as it
extends; but in order to be seen the spectrum must be received
for a few seconds upon the prepared surface through an aperture
in a dark room, then the aperture must be closed, and the temperature
of the surface raised two or three hundred degrees; the
phosphorescent parts then shine brilliantly and the dark lines
appear black. Since the parts of similar refrangibility in different
spectra are traversed by the same dark lines, rays of the same
refrangibility are probably absorbed at the same time by the different
media through which they pass.
217It appears from the experiments of MM. Becquerel and Biot,
that electrical disturbances produce these phosphorescent effects.
There is thus a mysterious connexion between the most refrangible
rays and electricity which the experiments of M. E. Becquerel
confirm, showing that electricity is developed during chemical
action by the violet rays, that it is feebly developed by the
blue and indigo, but that none is excited by the less refrangible
part of the spectrum.
A series of experiments by Sir John Herschel have disclosed
a new set of obscure rays in the solar spectrum, which seem to
bear the same relation to those of heat that the photographic or
chemical rays bear to the luminous. They are situate in that
part of the spectrum which is occupied by the less refrangible
visible colours, and have been named by their discoverer Parathermic
rays. It must be held in remembrance that the region
of greatest heat in the solar spectrum lies in the dark space
beyond the visible red. Now, Sir John Herschel found that in
experiments with a solution of gum guaiacum in soda, which
gives the paper a green colour, the green, yellow, orange, and
red rays of the spectrum invariably discharged the colour, while
no effect was produced by the extra-spectral rays of heat, which
ought to have had the greatest effect had heat been the cause of
the phenomenon. When an aqueous solution of chlorine was
poured over a slip of paper prepared with gum guaiacum dissolved
in soda, a colour varying from a deep somewhat greenish
hue to a fine celestial blue was given to it; and, when the solar
spectrum was thrown on the paper while moist, the colour was
discharged from all the space under the less refrangible luminous
rays, at the same time that the more distant thermic rays beyond
the spectrum evaporated the moisture from the space on which
they fell; so that the heat spots became apparent. But the
spots disappeared as the paper dried, leaving the surface unchanged;
while the photographic impression within the visible
spectrum increased in intensity; the non-luminous thermic rays,
though evidently active as to heat, were yet incapable of effecting
that peculiar chemical change which other rays of much less
heating power were all the time producing. Sir John having
ascertained that an artificial heat from 180° to 280° of Fahrenheit
changed the green tint of gum guaiacum to its original yellow
hue when moist, but that it had no effect when dry, he therefore
218tried whether heat from a hot iron applied to the back of
the paper used in the last-mentioned experiment while under
the influence of the solar spectrum might not assist the action
of the calorific rays; but, instead of doing so, it greatly accelerated
the discoloration over the spaces occupied by the less
refrangible rays, but had no effect on the extra-spectral region
of maximum heat. Obscure terrestrial heat, therefore, is capable
of assisting and being assisted in effecting this peculiar change
by those rays of the spectrum, whether luminous or thermic,
which occupy its red, yellow, and green regions; while, on the
other hand, it receives no such assistance from the purely
thermic rays beyond the spectrum acting under similar circumstances
and in an equal state of condensation.
The conclusions drawn from these experiments are confirmed
by that which follows: a photographic picture formed on paper
prepared with a mixture of the solutions of ammonia-citrate of
iron and ferro-sesquicyanite of potash in equal parts, then thrown
into water and afterwards dried, will be blue and negative, that
is to say, the lights and shadows will be the reverse of what
they are in nature. If in this state the paper be washed with a
solution of proto-nitrate of mercury, the picture will be discharged;
but if it be well washed and dried, and a hot smoothing-iron
passed over it, the picture instantly reappears, not blue, but
brown; if kept some weeks in this state in perfect darkness
between the leaves of a portfolio, it fades, and almost entirely
vanishes, but a fresh application of heat restores it to its full
original intensity. This curious change is not the effect of light, at
least not of light alone. A certain temperature must be attained,
and that suffices in total darkness; yet, on exposing to a very concentrated
spectrum a slip of the paper used in the last experiment,
after the uniform blue colour has been discharged and a white
ground left, this whiteness is changed to brown over the whole region
of the red and orange rays, but not beyond the luminous spectrum.
Sir John thence concludes:—1st. That it is the heat of these
rays, not their light, which operates the change; 2ndly. That
this heat possesses a peculiar chemical quality which is not possessed
by the purely calorific rays outside of the visible spectrum,
though far more intense; and, 3rdly. That the heat radiated
from obscurely hot iron abounds especially in rays analogous to
those of the region of the spectrum above indicated.
219Another instance of these singular transformations may be
noticed. The pictures formed on cyanotype paper rendered more
sensitive by the addition of corrosive sublimate are blue on a
white ground and positive, that is, the lights and shadows are
the same as in nature, but, by the application of heat, the colour
is changed from blue to brown, from positive to negative; even
by keeping in darkness the blue colour is restored, as well as the
positive character. Sir John attributes this, as in the former
instance, to certain rays, which, regarded as rays of heat or light,
or of some influence sui generis accompanying the red and orange
rays of the spectrum, are also copiously emitted by bodies heated
short of redness. He thinks it probable that these invisible parathermic
rays are the rays which radiate from molecule to molecule
in the interior of bodies, that they determine the discharge
of vegetable colours at the boiling temperature, and also the
innumerable atomic transformations of organic bodies which take
place at the temperature below redness, that they are distinct from
those of pure heat, and that they are sufficiently identified by
these characters to become legitimate objects of scientific discussion.
The calorific and parathermic rays appear to be intimately
connected with the discoveries of Messrs. Draper and Moser.
Daguerre has shown that the action of light on the iodide of
silver renders it capable of condensing the vapour of mercury
which adheres to the parts affected by it. Professor Moser of
Königsberg has proved that the same effect is produced by the
simple contact of bodies, and even by their very near juxtaposition,
and that in total darkness as well as in light. This
discovery he announced in the following words:—“If a surface
has been touched in any particular parts by any body, it acquires
the property of precipitating all vapours, and these adhere to it
or combine chemically with it on these spots differently from what
they do on the untouched parts.” If we write on a plate of glass
or any smooth surface whatever with blotting-paper, a brush, or
anything else, and then clean it, the characters always reappear
if the plate or surface be breathed upon, and the same effect may
be produced even on the surface of mercury; nor is absolute contact
necessary. If a screen cut in a pattern be held over a polished
metallic surface at a small distance, and the whole breathed on,
after the vapour has evaporated so that no trace is left on the
surface, the pattern comes out when it is breathed on again.
220Professor Moser proved that bodies exert a very decided influence
upon each other, by placing coins, cut stones, pieces of horn,
and other substances, for a short time on a warm metallic plate:
when the substance was removed, no impression appeared on the
plate till it was breathed upon or exposed to the vapour of mercury,
and then these vapours adhered only to the parts where the
substance had been placed, making distinct images, which in
some cases were permanent after the vapour was removed.
Similar impressions were obtained on glass and other substances
even when the bodies were not in contact, and the results were
the same whether the experiments were performed in light or in
darkness.
Mr. Grove found, when plates of zinc and copper were closely
approximated, but not in contact, and suddenly separated, that
one was positively and the other negatively electric; whence he
inferred that the intervening medium was either polarised, or
that a radiation analogous, if not identical, with that which produces
Moser’s images takes place from plate to plate.
Mr. Hunt has shown that many of these phenomena depend
on difference of temperature, and that, in order to obtain good
impressions, dissimilar metals must be used. For example, gold,
silver, bronze, and copper coins were placed on a plate of copper
too hot to be touched, and allowed to remain till the plate
cooled: all the coins had made an impression, the distinctness
and intensity of which were in the order of the metals named.
When the plate was exposed to the vapour of mercury the result
was the same, but, when the vapour was wiped off, the gold and
silver coins only had left permanent images on the copper.
These impressions are often minutely perfect, whether the coins
are in actual contact with the plate or one-eighth of an inch
above it. The mass of the metal has a material influence on the
result; a large copper coin makes a better impression on a copper
plate than a small silver coin. When coins of different metals
are placed on the same plate they interfere with each other.
When, instead of being heated, the copper plate was cooled by
a freezing mixture, and bad conductors of heat laid upon it, as
wood, paper, glass, &c., the result was similar.
Mr. Hunt, observing that a black substance leaves a stronger
impression on a metallic surface than a white, applied the property
to the art of copying prints, woodcuts, writing, and
221printing, on copper amalgamated on one surface and highly
polished, merely by placing the object to be copied smoothly on
the metal, and pressing it into close contact by a plate of glass:
after some hours the plate is subjected to the vapour of mercury,
and afterwards to that of iodine, when a black and accurate impression
of the object comes out on a grey ground. Effects
similar to those attributed to heat may also be produced by electricity.
Mr. Karsten, by placing a glass plate upon one of
metal, and on the glass plate a medal subjected to discharges of
electricity, found a perfect image of the medal impressed on the
glass, which could be brought into evidence by either mercury
or iodine; and, when several plates of glass were interposed
between the medal and the metallic plate, each plate of glass
received an image on its upper surface after the passage of electrical
discharges. These discharges have the remarkable power
of restoring impressions that have been long obliterated from
plates by polishing—a proof that the disturbances upon which
these phenomena depend are not confined to the surface of the
metals, but that a very decided molecular change has taken place
to a considerable depth. Mr. Hunt’s experiments prove that the
electro-negative metals make the most decided images upon
electro-negative plates, and vice versâ. M. Matteucci has shown
that a discharge of electricity does not visibly affect a polished
silver plate, but that it produces an alteration which renders it
capable of condensing vapour.
The impression of an engraving was made by laying it face
downwards on a silver plate iodized, and placing an amalgamated
copper plate upon it; it was left in darkness fifteen hours, during
which time an impression of the engraving had been made on the
amalgamated plate through the paper.
An iodized silver plate was placed in darkness with a coil of
string laid on it, and with a polished silver plate suspended one-eighth
of an inch above it: after four hours they were exposed
to the vapours of mercury, which became uniformly deposited on
the iodized plate, but on the silver one there was a sharp image
of the string, so that this image was formed in the dark, and
even without contact. Coins or other objects leave their impressions
in the same manner with perfect sharpness and accuracy,
when brought out by vapour without contact, in darkness, and
on simple metals.
222Red and orange coloured media, smoked glass, and all bodies
that transmit or absorb the hot rays freely, leave strong impressions
on a plate of copper, whether they be in contact or one-eighth
of an inch above it. Heat must be concerned in this, for
a solar spectrum concentrated by a lens was thrown on a polished
plate of copper, and kept on the same spot by a heliostat for two
or three hours: when exposed to mercurial vapour, a film of the
vapour covered the plate where the diffused light which always
accompanies the solar spectrum had fallen. On the obscure
space occupied by the maximum heating power of Sir William
Herschel, and also on the great heat spot in the thermic spectrum
of Sir John Herschel, the condensation of the mercury was so
thick that it stood out a distinct white spot on the plate, while
over the whole space that had been under the visible spectrum
the quantity of vapour was much less than that which covered
the other parts, affording distinct evidence of a negative effect in
the luminous spectrum and of the power of the hot rays, which
is not always confined to the surface of the metal, since in many
instances the impressions penetrated to a considerable depth
below it, and consequently were permanent.
Several of these singular effects appear to be owing to the
mutual action of molecules in contact while in a different state,
whether of electricity or temperature: others clearly point at
some unknown influence exerted between surfaces at a distance,
and affecting their molecular structure: possibly it may be the
parathermic rays, which have a peculiar chemical action even in
total darkness. In the last experiment the effect is certainly
produced by the positive portion of one of those remarkable
antagonist principles which characterise the solar spectrum.
Thus it appears that the prism resolves the pure white sunbeam
into three superposed spectra, each varying in refrangibility and
intensity throughout its whole length; the visible part is overlapped
at one end by the chemical or photographic rays, and at
the other by the thermic, but the two latter so much exceed the
visible part, that the linear dimensions of the three—the luminous,
thermic, and photographic—are in proportion to the numbers
25, 42·10, and 55·10, so that the whole solar spectrum is twice
as long as its visible part. The two extremities exert a decided
antagonist energy. The least refrangible luminous rays
obliterate the action of the photographic rays, while the latter
223produce phosphorescent light, which is extinguished by the
least refrangible luminous rays. According to Mr. Hunt’s experiment,
the hot rays condense mercurial vapour on a polished
metallic plate, while the luminous rays prevent its formation.
Electricity is excited by the chemical rays, while the parathermic
are found in the less refrangible rays alone. Each of the spectra
is crossed by coloured and rayless lines peculiar to itself, and
these are traversed at right angles by innumerable dark lines of
various breadths, the whole forming an inexpressibly wonderful
and glorious creation.
The arrangement varies a little according to the material of
the prism and the manner of producing the spectrum, as in that
obtained by Professor Draper from diffracted light. It was
formed by a beam diffracted by passing through a netting of
fine wire, or by reflection from a polished surface of steel, having
fine parallel lines drawn on it. This diffracted spectrum is
divided into two equal parts in the centre of the yellow; and
as in the prismatic spectrum, one half is antagonist to the other
half, the red or negative end undoing what the positive or
violet end has done. The centre of the yellow is the hottest
part, and the heat decreases to both extremities. A line of cold
is supposed to exist on this spectrum answering to Fraunhofer’s
dark line H.
The undulations of the ethereal medium which constitute a
sunbeam must be infinitely varied, each influence having a
vibration peculiar to itself. Those of light are certainly transverse
to the direction of the ray; while Professor Draper believes
that those of heat are normal, that is, in the direction of the ray,
like those of sound. A doubt exists whether the vibrations of
polarised light are perpendicular to the plane of polarisation or
in that plane. Professor Stokes of Cambridge has come to the
conclusion, both from the diffracted spectrum and theory, that
they are perpendicular to the plane of polarisation, but M. Holtzmann
is of opinion that they are in that plane, so the subject
is still open to discussion.</div></body></text></TEI>