<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="5">
27
SECTION IV.

Theory of Jupiter’s Satellites—Effects of the Figure of Jupiter upon his
Satellites—Position of their Orbits—Singular Laws among the Motions
of the first Three Satellites—Eclipses of the Satellites—Velocity of
Light—Aberration—Ethereal Medium—Satellites of Saturn and
Uranus.
The changes which take place in the planetary system are
exhibited on a smaller scale by Jupiter and his satellites; and,
as the period requisite for the development of the inequalities of
these moons only extends to a few centuries, it may be regarded
as an epitome of that grand cycle which will not be accomplished
by the planets in myriads of ages. The revolutions of the satellites
about Jupiter are precisely similar to those of the planets
about the sun; it is true they are disturbed by the sun, but his
distance is so great, that their motions are nearly the same as if
they were not under his influence. The satellites, like the
planets, were probably projected in elliptical orbits: but, as the
masses of the satellites are nearly 100,000 times less than that
of Jupiter; and as the compression of Jupiter’s spheroid is so
great, in consequence of his rapid rotation, that his equatorial
diameter exceeds his polar diameter by no less than 6000 miles;
the immense quantity of prominent matter at his equator must
soon have given the circular form observed in the orbits of the
first and second satellites, which its superior attraction will always
maintain. The third and fourth satellites, being farther removed
from its influence, revolve in orbits with a very small excentricity.
And, although the first two sensibly move in circles,
their orbits acquire a small ellipticity, from the disturbances they
experience (N. 86).
It has been stated, that the attraction of a sphere on an
exterior body is the same as if its mass were united in one particle
in its centre of gravity, and therefore inversely as the square
of the distance. In a spheroid, however, there is an additional
force arising from the bulging mass at its equator, which, not
following the exact law of gravity, acts as a disturbing force.
28One effect of this disturbing force in the spheroid of Jupiter is to
occasion a direct motion in the greater axes of the orbits of all
his satellites, which is more rapid the nearer the satellite is to
the planet, and very much greater than that part of their motion
which arises from the disturbing action of the sun. The same
cause occasions the orbits of the satellites to remain nearly in the
plane of Jupiter’s equator (N. 87), on account of which the
satellites are always seen nearly in the same line (N. 88); and
the powerful action of that quantity of prominent matter is the
reason why the motions of the nodes of these small bodies are so
much more rapid than those of the planet. The nodes of the
fourth satellite accomplish a tropical revolution in 531 years,
while those of Jupiter’s orbit require no less than 36,261 years;—a
proof of the reciprocal attraction between each particle of
Jupiter’s equator and of the satellites. In fact, if the satellites
moved exactly in the plane of Jupiter’s equator, they would not
be pulled out of that plane, because his attraction would be equal
on both sides of it. But, as their orbits have a small inclination
to the plane of the planet’s equator, there is a want of symmetry,
and the action of the protuberant matter tends to make the nodes
regress by pulling the satellites above or below the planes of
their orbits; an action which is so great on the interior satellites,
that the motions of their nodes are nearly the same as if no
other disturbing force existed.
The orbits of the satellites do not retain a permanent inclination,
either to the plane of Jupiter’s equator, or to that of his
orbit, but to certain planes passing between the two, and through
their intersection. These have a greater inclination to his
equator the farther the satellite is removed, owing to the influence
of Jupiter’s compression; and they have a slow motion
corresponding to secular variations in the planes of Jupiter’s
orbit and equator.
The satellites are not only subject to periodic and secular
inequalities from their mutual attraction, similar to those which
affect the motions and orbits of the planets, but also to others
peculiar to themselves. Of the periodic inequalities arising from
their mutual attraction the most remarkable take place in the
angular motions (N. 89) of the three nearest to Jupiter, the
second of which receives from the first a perturbation similar to
that which it produces in the third; and it experiences from the
29third a perturbation similar to that which it communicates to the
first. In the eclipses these two inequalities are combined into
one, whose period is 437·659 days. The variations peculiar to the
satellites arise from the secular inequalities occasioned by the
action of the planets in the form and position of Jupiter’s orbit,
and from the displacement of his equator. It is obvious that
whatever alters the relative positions of the sun, Jupiter, and his
satellites, must occasion a change in the directions and intensities
of the forces, which will affect the motions and orbits of the
satellites. For this reason the secular variations in the excentricity
of Jupiter’s orbit occasion secular inequalities in the mean
motions of the satellites, and in the motions of the nodes and
apsides of their orbits. The displacement of the orbit of Jupiter,
and the variation in the position of his equator, also affect these
small bodies (N. 90). The plane of Jupiter’s equator is inclined
to the plane of his orbit at an angle of 3° 5ʹ 30ʺ, so that the
action of the sun and of the satellites themselves produces a
nutation and precession (N. 91) in his equator, precisely similar
to that which takes place in the rotation of the earth, from the
action of the sun and moon. Hence the protuberant matter at
Jupiter’s equator is continually changing its position with regard
to the satellites, and produces corresponding mutations in their
motions. And, as the cause must be proportional to the effect,
these inequalities afford the means, not only of ascertaining the
compression of Jupiter’s spheroid, but they prove that his mass
is not homogeneous. Although the apparent diameters of the
satellites are too small to be measured, yet their perturbations
give the values of their masses with considerable accuracy—a
striking proof of the power of analysis.
A singular law obtains among the mean motions and mean
longitudes of the first three satellites. It appears from observation
that the mean motion of the first satellite, plus twice that
of the third, is equal to three times that of the second; and that
the mean longitude of the first satellite, minus three times that
of the second, plus twice that of the third, is always equal to two
right angles. It is proved by theory, that, if these relations had
only been approximate when the satellites were first launched
into space, their mutual attractions would have established and
maintained them, notwithstanding the secular inequalities to
which they are liable. They extend to the synodic motions
30(N. 92) of the satellites; consequently they affect their eclipses,
and have a very great influence on their whole theory. The
satellites move so nearly in the plane of Jupiter’s equator, which
has a very small inclination to his orbit, that the first three are
eclipsed at each revolution by the shadow of the planet, which
is much larger than the shadow of the moon: the fourth satellite
is not eclipsed so frequently as the others. The eclipses take
place close to the disc of Jupiter when he is near opposition
(N. 93); but at times his shadow is so projected with regard to
the earth, that the third and fourth satellites vanish and reappear
on the same side of the disc (N. 94). These eclipses are in all
respects similar to those of the moon: but, occasionally, the
satellites eclipse Jupiter, sometimes passing like obscure spots
across his surface, resembling annular eclipses of the sun, and
sometimes like a bright spot traversing one of his dark belts.
Before opposition, the shadow of the satellite, like a round black
spot, precedes its passage over the disc of the planet; and, after
opposition, the shadow follows the satellite.
In consequence of the relations already mentioned in the mean
motions and mean longitudes of the first three satellites, they
never can be all eclipsed at the same time: for, when the second
and third are in one direction, the first is in the opposite direction;
consequently, when the first is eclipsed, the other two must
be between the sun and Jupiter. The instant of the beginning
or end of an eclipse of a satellite marks the same instant of
absolute time to all the inhabitants of the earth; therefore, the
time of these eclipses observed by a traveller, when compared
with the time of the eclipse computed for Greenwich, or any
other fixed meridian (N. 95), gives the difference of the meridians
in time, and, consequently, the longitude of the place of
observation. The longitude is determined with extreme precision
whenever it is possible to convey the time instantaneously
by means of electricity from one place to another, since it
obviates the errors of clocks and chronometers. The eclipses of
Jupiter’s satellites have been the means of a discovery which,
though not so immediately applicable to the wants of man,
unfolds one of the properties of light—that medium without
whose cheering influence all the beauties of the creation would
have been to us a blank. It is observed, that those eclipses of
the first satellite which happen when Jupiter is near conjunction
31(N. 96), are later by 16ʹ 26ʺ·6 than those which take place when
the planet is in opposition. As Jupiter is nearer to us when in
opposition by the whole breadth of the earth’s orbit than when in
conjunction, this circumstance is to be attributed to the time employed
by the rays of light in crossing the earth’s orbit, a distance
of about 190,000,000 of miles; whence it is estimated that light
travels at the rate of 192,000 miles in one second. Such is its
velocity, that the earth, moving at the rate of nineteen miles in
a second, would take two months to pass through a distance
which a ray of light would dart over in eight minutes. The
subsequent discovery of the aberration of light has fully confirmed
this astonishing result.
Objects appear to be situate in the direction of the rays which
proceed from them. Were light propagated instantaneously,
every object, whether at rest or in motion, would appear in the
direction of these rays; but, as light takes some time to travel,
we see Jupiter in conjunction, by means of rays that left him
16m 26s·6 before; but, during that time, we have changed our
position, in consequence of the motion of the earth in its orbit:
we therefore refer Jupiter to a place in which he is not. His true
position is in the diagonal (N. 97) of the parallelogram, whose
sides are in the ratio of the velocity of light to the velocity of the
earth in its orbit, which is as 192,000 to 19, or nearly as 10,000
to 1. In consequence of the aberration of light, the heavenly
bodies seem to be in places in which they are not. In fact, if
the earth were at rest, rays from a star would pass along the axis
of a telescope directed to it; but, if the earth were to begin to
move in its orbit with its usual velocity, these rays would strike
against the side of the tube; it would, therefore, be necessary to
incline the telescope a little, in order to see the star. The angle
contained between the axis of the telescope and a line drawn to
the true place of the star is its aberration, which varies in
quantity and direction in different parts of the earth’s orbit; but,
as it is only 20ʺ·481, it is insensible in ordinary cases (N. 98).
The velocity of light deduced from the observed aberration of
the fixed stars perfectly corresponds with that given by the
eclipses of the first satellite. The same result, obtained from
sources so different, leaves not a doubt of its truth. Many such
beautiful coincidences, derived from circumstances apparently
the most unpromising and dissimilar, occur in physical astronomy,
32and prove connections which we might otherwise be unable to
trace. The identity of the velocity of light, at the distance of
Jupiter, and on the earth’s surface, shows that its velocity is
uniform; and as light consists in the vibrations of an elastic
medium or ether filling space, the uniformity of its velocity
shows that the density of the medium throughout the whole
extent of the solar system must be proportional to its elasticity
(N. 99). Among the fortunate conjectures which have been
confirmed by subsequent experience, that of Bacon is not the
least remarkable, “It produces in me,” says the restorer of true
philosophy, “a doubt whether the face of the serene and starry
heavens be seen at the instant it really exists, or not till some
time later: and whether there be not, with respect to the
heavenly bodies, a true time and an apparent time, no less than
a true place and an apparent place, as astronomers say, on
account of parallax. For it seems incredible that the species or
rays of the celestial bodies can pass through the immense interval
between them and us in an instant, or that they do not even
require some considerable portion of time.”
Great discoveries generally lead to a variety of conclusions:
the aberration of light affords a direct proof of the motion of the
earth in its orbit; and its rotation is proved by the theory of
falling bodies, since the centrifugal force it induces retards the
oscillations of the pendulum (N. 100) in going from the pole to
the equator. Thus a high degree of scientific knowledge has
been requisite to dispel the errors of the senses (N. 237).
The little that is known of the theories of the satellites of
Saturn and Uranus is, in all respects, similar to that of Jupiter.
Saturn is accompanied by eight satellites. The seventh is about
the size of Mars, and the eighth was simultaneously discovered
by Mr. Bond in America, and that distinguished astronomer Mr.
Lassell, of Liverpool. The orbits of the two last have a sensible
inclination to the plane of the ring; but the great compression
of Saturn occasions the other satellites to move nearly in the
plane of his equator. So many circumstances must concur to
render the two interior satellites visible, that they have very
rarely been seen. They move exactly at the edge of the ring,
and their orbits never deviate from its plane. In 1789 Sir
William Herschel saw them like beads, threading the slender
line of light which the ring is reduced to when seen edgewise
33from the earth. And for a short time he perceived them advancing
off it at each end, when turning round in their orbits. The
eclipses of the exterior satellites only take place when the ring is
in this position. Mr. Lassell, with a powerful telescope, made
by himself, has seen Iapetus, the nearest of the two, on several
occasions, even when the opening of the ring was very wide,
which made it extremely difficult to see so minute an object. Of
the situation of the equator of Uranus we know nothing, nor of
his compression; but the orbits of his satellites are nearly perpendicular
to the plane of the ecliptic; and, by analogy, they
ought to be in the plane of his equator. Uranus is so remote
that he has more the appearance of a planetary nebula than a
planet, which renders it extremely difficult to distinguish the
satellites at all; and quite hopeless without such a telescope as
is rarely to be met with even in observatories. Sir William
Herschel discovered the two that are farthest from the planet,
and ascertained their approximate periods, which his son afterwards
determined to be 13d 11h 7m 12s·6 and 8d 16h 56m 28s·6
respectively. The orbits of both seem to have an inclination of
about 101°·2 to the plane of the ecliptic. The two interior
satellites are so faint and small, and so near the edge of the
planet, that they can with difficulty be seen even under the most
favourable circumstances: however, Mr. Lassell has ascertained
that the more distant of the two revolves about Uranus in 4 days,
and that nearest to the planet in
21⁄2
days, and from a long and
minute examination he is convinced that the system only consists
of four satellites. Soon after Neptune was seen Mr. Lassell
discovered the only satellite known to belong to that planet.
The satellites of Uranus and Neptune, the two planets on the
remotest verge of the solar system, offer the singular and only
instance of a revolution from east to west, while all the planets
and all the other satellites revolve from west to east. Retrograde
motion is occasionally met with in the comets and double stars.</div></body></text></TEI>