<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="22">
179
SECTION XXI.

Polarization of Light—Defined—Polarization by Refraction—Properties
of the Tourmaline—Double Refraction—All doubly Refracted Light is
Polarized—Properties of Iceland Spar—Tourmaline absorbs one of the
two Refracted Rays—Undulations of Natural Light—Undulations of
Polarized Light—The Optic Axes of Crystals—M. Fresnel’s Discoveries
on the Rays passing along the Optic Axis—Polarization by Reflection.
In giving a sketch of the constitution of light, it is impossible to
omit the extraordinary property of its polarization, “the phenomena
of which,” Sir John Herschel says, “are so singular and
various, that to one who has only studied the common branches
of physical optics it is like entering into a new world, so splendid
as to render it one of the most delightful branches of experimental
inquiry, and so fertile in the views it lays open of the
constitution of natural bodies, and the minuter mechanism of the
universe, as to place it in the very first rank of the physico-mathematical
sciences, which it maintains by the rigorous application
of geometrical reasoning its nature admits and requires.”
Light is said to be polarized, which, by being once reflected or
refracted, is rendered incapable of being again reflected or refracted
at certain angles. In general, when a ray of light is
reflected from a pane of plate-glass, or any other substance, it
may be reflected a second time from another surface, and it will
also pass freely through transparent bodies. But, if a ray of
light be reflected from a pane of plate-glass at an angle of 57°,
it is rendered totally incapable of reflection at the surface of
another pane of glass in certain definite positions, but it will be
completely reflected by the second pane in other positions. It
likewise loses the property of penetrating transparent bodies in
particular positions, whilst it is freely transmitted by them in
others. Light, so modified as to be incapable of reflection and
transmission in certain directions, is said to be polarized.
Light may be polarized by reflection from any polished surface,
and the same property is also imparted by refraction. It is proposed
to explain these methods of polarizing light, to give a short
180account of its most remarkable properties, and to endeavour to
describe a few of the splendid phenomena it exhibits.
If a brown tourmaline, which is a mineral generally crystallized
in the form of a long prism, be cut longitudinally, that is,
parallel to the axis of the prism, into plates about the thirtieth
of an inch in thickness, and the surfaces polished, luminous
objects may be seen through them, as through plates of coloured
glass. The axis of each plate is in its longitudinal section parallel
to the axis of the prism whence it was cut (N. 204). If one of
these plates be held perpendicularly between the eye and a
candle, and turned slowly round in its own plane, no change will
take place in the image of the candle. But if the plate be held
in a fixed position, with its axis or longitudinal section vertical,
when a second plate of tourmaline is interposed between it and
the eye, parallel to the first, and turned slowly round in its own
plane, a remarkable change will be found to have taken place in
the nature of the light. For the image of the candle will vanish
and appear alternately at every quarter revolution of the plate,
varying through all degrees of brightness down to total or almost
total evanescence, and then increasing again by the same degrees
as it had before decreased. These changes depend upon the relative
positions of the plates. When the longitudinal sections of
the two plates are parallel, the brightness of the image is at its
maximum; and, when the axes of the sections cross at right
angles, the image of the candle vanishes. Thus the light, in
passing through the first plate of tourmaline, has acquired a
property totally different from the direct light of the candle.
The direct light would have penetrated the second plate equally
well in all directions, whereas the refracted ray will only pass
through it in particular positions, and is altogether incapable of
penetrating it in others. The refracted ray is polarized in its
passage through the first tourmaline, and experience shows that
it never loses that property, unless when acted upon by a new
substance. Thus, one of the properties of polarized light is the
incapability of passing through a plate of tourmaline perpendicular
to it, in certain positions, and its ready transmission in other
positions at right angles to the former.
Many other substances have the property of polarizing light.
If a ray of light falls upon a transparent medium, which has the
same temperature, density, and structure throughout every part,
181as fluids, gases, glass, &c., and a few regularly crystallized
minerals, it is refracted into a single pencil of light by the laws
of ordinary refraction, according to which the ray, passing through
the refracting surface from the object to the eye, never quits a
plane perpendicular to that surface. Almost all other bodies,
such as the greater number of crystallized minerals, animal and
vegetable substances, gums, resins, jellies, and all solid bodies
having unequal tensions, whether from unequal temperature or
pressure, possess the property of doubling the image or appearance
of an object seen through them in certain directions;
because a ray of natural light falling upon them is refracted into
two pencils which move with different velocities, and are more or
less separated, according to the nature of the body and the direction
of the incident ray. Whenever a ray of natural light is thus
divided into two pencils in its passage through a substance, both
of the transmitted rays are polarized. Iceland spar, a carbonate
of lime, which by its natural cleavage may be split into the
form of a rhombohedron, possesses the property of double refraction
in an eminent degree, as may be seen by pasting a piece of
paper, with a large pin-hole in it, on the side of the spar farthest
from the eye. The hole will appear double when held to the
light (N. 205). One of these pencils is refracted according to the
same law as in glass or water, never quitting the plane perpendicular
to the refracting surface, and is therefore called the ordinary
ray. But the other does quit the plane, being refracted
according to a different and much more complicated law, and on
that account is called the extraordinary ray. For the same
reason one image is called the ordinary, and the other the extraordinary
image. When the spar is turned round in the same
plane, the extraordinary image of the hole revolves about the
ordinary image, which remains fixed, both being equally bright.
But if the spar be kept in one position, and viewed through a
plate of tourmaline, it will be found that, as the tourmaline
revolves, the images vary in their relative brightness—one increases
in intensity till it arrives at a maximum, at the same
time that the other diminishes till it vanishes, and so on alternately
at each quarter revolution, proving both rays to be
polarized. For in one position the tourmaline transmits the
ordinary ray, and reflects the extraordinary; and, after revolving
90°, the extraordinary ray is transmitted, and the ordinary ray is
182reflected. Thus another property of polarized light is, that it
cannot be divided into two equal pencils by double refraction, in
positions of the doubly refracting bodies in which a ray of common
light would be so divided.
Were tourmaline like other doubly refracting bodies, each of
the transmitted rays would be double; but that mineral, when of
a certain thickness, after separating the light into two polarized
pencils, absorbs that which undergoes ordinary refraction, and
consequently shows only one image of an object. On this account
tourmaline is peculiarly fitted for analyzing polarized light, which
shows nothing remarkable till viewed through it or something
equivalent.
The pencils of light, on leaving a double refracting substance,
are parallel; and it is clear, from the preceding experiments,
that they are polarized in planes at right angles to each other
(N. 206). But that will be better understood by considering the
change produced in common light by the action of the polarizing
body. It has been shown that the undulations of ether, which
produce the sensation of common light, are performed in every
possible plane, at right angles to the direction in which the ray
is moving. But the case is very different after the ray has passed
through a doubly refracting substance, like Iceland spar. The
light then proceeds in two parallel pencils, whose undulations
are still indeed transverse to the direction of the rays, but they
are accomplished in planes at right angles to one another, analogous
to two parallel stretched cords, one of which performs its
undulations only in a horizontal plane, and the other in a vertical
or upright plane (N. 206). Thus the polarizing action of Iceland
spar and of all doubly refracting substances is to separate a ray
of common light, whose waves or undulations are in every plane,
into two parallel rays, whose waves or undulations lie in planes
at right angles to each other. By a simple mechanical law each
vibratory motion of the first is resolved into two vibratory
motions at right angles to one another. The ray of common
light may be assimilated to a round rod, whereas the two polarized
rays are like two parallel long flat rulers, one of which is
laid horizontally on its broad surface, and the other horizontally
on its edge. The alternate transmission and obstruction of one
of these flattened beams by the tourmaline is similar to the
facility with which a card may be passed between the bars of a
183grating or wires of a cage, if presented edgeways, and the impossibility
of its passing in a transverse direction.
Although it generally happens that a ray of light, in passing
through Iceland spar, is separated into two polarized rays, yet
there is one direction along which it is refracted in one ray only,
and that according to the ordinary law. This direction is called
the optic axis (N. 207). Many crystals and other substances
have two optic axes, inclined to each other, along which a ray of
light is transmitted in one pencil by the law of ordinary refraction.
The extraordinary ray is sometimes refracted towards the
optic axis, as in quartz, zircon, ice, &c., which are therefore said
to be positive crystals; but when it is bent from the optic axis,
as in Iceland spar, tourmaline, emerald, beryl, &c., the crystals
are negative, which is the most numerous class. The ordinary
ray moves with uniform velocity within a doubly refracting substance,
but the velocity of the extraordinary ray varies with the
position of the ray relatively to the optic axis, being a maximum
when its motion within the crystal is at right angles to the
optic axis, and a minimum when parallel to it. Between these
extremes its velocity varies according to a determinate law.
It had been inferred, from the action of Iceland spar on light,
that in all doubly refracting substances one only of two rays is
turned aside from the plane of ordinary refraction, while the
other follows the ordinary law; and the great difficulty of
observing the phenomena tended to confirm that opinion. M.
Fresnel, however, proved by a most profound mathematical
inquiry, à priori, that the extraordinary ray must be wanting in
glass and other uncrystallized substances, and that it must
necessarily exist in carbonate of lime, quartz, and other bodies
having one optic axis, but that in a numerous class of substances,
which possess two optic axes, both rays must undergo extraordinary
refraction, and consequently that both must deviate from
their original plane; and these results have been perfectly confirmed
by subsequent experiments. This theory of refraction,
which for generalization is perhaps only inferior to the law of
gravitation, has enrolled the name of Fresnel among those which
pass not away, and makes his early loss a subject of deep regret
to all who take an interest in the higher paths of scientific
research.
When a beam of common light is partly reflected at, and
184partly transmitted through a transparent surface, the reflected
and refracted pencils contain equal quantities of polarized light,
and their planes of polarization are at right angles to one
another: hence, a pile of panes of glass will give a polarized
beam by refraction. For, if a ray of common light pass through
them, part of it will be polarized by the first plate, the second
plate will polarize a part of what passes through it, and the rest
will do the same in succession, till the whole beam is polarized,
except what is lost by reflection at the different surfaces, or by
absorption. This beam is polarized in a plane at right angles to
the plane of reflection, that is, at right angles to the plane passing
through the incident and reflected ray (N. 208).
By far the most convenient way of polarizing light is by
reflection. A plane of plate-glass laid upon a piece of black
cloth, on a table at an open window, will appear of a uniform
brightness from the reflection of the sky or clouds. But if it be
viewed through a plate of tourmaline, having its axis vertical,
instead of being illuminated as before, it will be obscured by a
large cloudy spot, having its centre quite dark, which will
readily be found by elevating or depressing the eye, and will
only be visible when the angle of incidence is 57°, that is, when
the line from the eye to the centre of the black spot makes an
angle of 33° with the surface of the reflector (N. 209). When
the tourmaline is turned round in its own plane, the dark cloud
will diminish, and entirely vanish when the axis of the tourmaline
is horizontal, and then every part of the surface of the glass
will be equally illuminated. As the tourmaline revolves, the
cloudy spot will appear and vanish alternately at every quarter
revolution. Thus, when a ray of light is incident on a pane of
plate-glass at an angle of 57°, the reflected ray is rendered
incapable of penetrating a plate of tourmaline whose axis is in
the plane of incidence. Consequently it has acquired the same
character as if it had been polarized by transmission through a
plate of tourmaline, with its axis at right angles to the plane of
reflection. It is found by experience that this polarized ray is
incapable of a second reflection at certain angles and in certain
positions of the incident plane. For if another pane of plate-glass,
having one surface blackened, be so placed as to make an
angle of 33° with the reflected ray, the image of the first pane
will be reflected in its surface, and will be alternately illuminated
185and obscured at every quarter revolution of the blackened pane,
according as the plane of reflection is parallel or perpendicular to
the plane of polarization. Since this happens by whatever means
the light has been polarized, it evinces another general property
of polarized light, which is, that it is incapable of reflection in a
plane at right angles to the plane of polarization.
All reflecting surfaces are capable of polarizing light, but the
angle of incidence at which it is completely polarized is different
in each substance (N. 210). It appears that the angle for plate-glass
is 57°; in crown-glass it is 56° 55ʹ, and no ray will be
completely polarized by water unless the angle of incidence be
53° 11ʹ. The angles at which different substances polarize light
are determined by a very simple and elegant law, discovered by
Sir David Brewster, “That the tangent of the polarizing angle
for any medium is equal to the sine of the angle of incidence
divided by the sine of the angle of refraction of that medium.”
Whence also the refractive power even of an opaque body is
known when its polarizing angle has been determined.
If a ray, polarized by refraction or by reflection from any
substance not metallic, be viewed through a piece of Iceland
spar, each image will alternately vanish and reappear at every
quarter revolution of the spar, whether it revolves from right to
left or from left to right; which shows that the properties of
the polarized ray are symmetrical on each side of the plane of
polarization.
Although there be only one angle in each substance at which
light is completely polarized by one reflection, yet it may be
polarized at any angle of incidence by a sufficient number of
reflections. For, if a ray falls upon the upper surface of a pile of
plates of glass at an angle greater or less than a polarizing angle,
a part only of the reflected ray will be polarized, but a part of
what is transmitted will be polarized by reflection at the surface
of the second plate, part at the third, and so on till the whole is
polarized. This is the best apparatus; but one plate of glass
having its inferior surface blackened, or even a polished table,
will answer the purpose.</div></body></text></TEI>