<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="30">
297
SECTION XXIX.

Voltaic Electricity—The Voltaic Battery—Intensity—Quantity—Static
Electricity, and Electricity in Motion—Luminous Effects—Mr.
Grove on the Electric Arc and Light—Decomposition of Water—Formation
of Crystals by Voltaic Electricity—Photo-galvanic Engraving—Conduction—Heat
of Voltaic Electricity—Electric Fish.
Voltaic or Dynamic electricity is elicited by the force of chemical
action. It is connected with some of the most brilliant
periods of British science, from the splendid discoveries to which
it led Sir Humphry Davy and Dr. Faraday.
In 1790, while Galvani, Professor of Anatomy in Bologna, was
making experiments on electricity, he was surprised to see convulsive
motions in the limbs of a dead frog accidentally lying
near the machine during an electrical discharge. Though a
similar action had been noticed long before his time, he was so
much struck with this singular phenomenon, that he examined all
the circumstances carefully, and at length found that convulsions
take place when the nerve and muscle of a frog are connected by
a metallic conductor. This excited the attention of all Europe;
and it was not long before Volta, Professor at Pavia, showed that
the mere contact of different bodies is sufficient to disturb electrical
equilibrium, and that a current of electricity flows in one
direction through a circuit of three conducting substances. From
this he was led, by acute reasoning and experiment, to the construction
of the Voltaic pile, which, in its early form, consisted
of alternate discs of zinc and copper, separated by pieces of wet
cloth, the extremities being connected by wires. This simple
apparatus, perhaps the most wonderful instrument that has been
invented by the ingenuity of man, by divesting electricity of its
sudden and uncontrollable violence, and giving in a continued
stream a greater quantity at a diminished intensity, has exhibited
that force under a new and manageable form, possessing powers
the most astonishing and unexpected. The expression current has
no relation to a fluid, which is now considered to be as inconsistent
with the phenomena of dynamic as with static electricity.
298It was shown by Grotthus that the transmission of Voltaic electricity
through liquids consists of a series of chemical affinities
acting in definite directions; and Mr. Grove, from an examination
of its action on the various kinds of matter, has come to the same
conclusion. Indeed it is now the generally received opinion that
a current of electricity is merely a continuous transmission of
chemical affinity from particle to particle of the substance through
which it is passing, and consequently that it is a continuous
transmission of force. As the Voltaic battery has become one of
the most important engines of physical research, some account
of its present condition may not be out of place.
The disturbance of electric equilibrium, and a development of
electricity, invariably accompany the chemical action of a fluid on
metallic substances, and the electricity is most plentiful when
that action occasions oxidation. Metals vary in the quantity of
electricity afforded by their combination with oxygen. But the
greatest abundance is developed by the oxidation of zinc by weak
sulphuric acid. And, in conformity with the law that one kind of
electricity cannot be evolved without an equal quantity of the
other being brought into activity, it is found that the acid is
positively, and the zinc negatively electric. It has not yet been
ascertained why equilibrium is not restored by the contact of
these two substances, which are both conductors, and in opposite
electrical states. However, the electrical and chemical changes
are so connected, that, unless equilibrium be restored, the action
of the acid will go on languidly, or stop as soon as a certain
quantity of electricity is accumulated in it. Equilibrium, nevertheless,
will be restored, and the action of the acid will be continuous,
if a plate of copper be placed in contact with the zinc,
both being immersed in the fluid; for the copper, not being
acted upon by the acid, will serve as a conductor to convey the
positive electricity from the acid to the zinc, and will at every
instant restore the equilibrium, and then the oxidation of the
zinc will go on rapidly. Thus three substances are concerned in
forming a Voltaic circuit, but it is indispensable that one of them
should be a fluid. The electricity so obtained will be very
feeble in overcoming resistances offered by imperfect conductors
interposed in the circuit, or by very long wires, but it may be
augmented by increasing the number of plates. In the common
Voltaic battery, the electricity which the fluid has acquired from
299the first plate of zinc exposed to its action is taken up by the
copper plate belonging to the second pair, and transferred to the
second zinc plate, with which it is connected. The second plate
of zinc, possessing equal powers, and acting in conformity with
the first, having thus acquired a larger portion of electricity than
its natural share, communicates a larger quantity to the fluid in
the second cell. This increased quantity is again transferred to
the next pair of plates; and thus every succeeding alternation is
productive of a further increase in the quantity of the electricity
developed. This action, however, would stop unless a vent were
given to the accumulated electricity, by establishing a communication
between the positive and negative poles of the battery by
means of wires attached to the extreme plate at each end. When
the wires are brought into contact, the Voltaic circuit is completed,
the electricities meet and neutralize each other, producing
the shock and other electrical phenomena; and then the electric
current continues to flow uninterruptedly in the circuit, as long
as the chemical action lasts. The stream of positive electricity
flows from the zinc to the copper. The construction and power
of the Voltaic battery have been much improved of late years, but
the most valuable improvement is the constant battery of Professor
Daniell. In all batteries of the ordinary construction,
the power, however energetic at first, rapidly diminishes, and
ultimately becomes very feeble. Professor Daniell found that
this diminution of power is occasioned by the adhesion of the
evolved hydrogen to the surface of the copper, and by the precipitation
of the sulphate formed by the action of the acid on the
zinc. He prevents the latter by interposing between the copper
and the zinc, in the cell containing the liquid, a membrane which,
without impeding the electric current, prevents the transfer of
the salt; and the former, by placing between the copper and the
membrane solution of sulphate of copper, which being reduced
by the hydrogen prevents the adhesion of this gas to the metallic
surface. Each element of the battery consists of a hollow cylinder
of copper, in the axis of which is placed a cylindrical rod of zinc;
between the zinc and the copper a membranous bag is placed,
which divides the cell into two portions, the inner of which is
filled with dilute acid, and the one nearer the copper is supplied
with crystals of the sulphate of that metal. The battery consists
of several of these elementary cells connected together by metallic
wires, the zinc rod of one with the copper cylinder of that
300next to it. The zinc rods are amalgamated, so that local action,
which, in ordinary cases, is so destructive of the zinc, does not
take place, and no chemical action is manifested unless the
circuit be completed. The rods are easily detached, and others
substituted for them when worn out. This battery, which possesses
considerable power, and is constant in its effects for a very
long time, is greatly superior to all former arrangements, either
as an instrument of research, or for exhibiting the ordinary phenomena
of Voltaic electricity.
A battery charged with water alone, instead of acid, is constant
in its action, but the quantity of electricity it develops is comparatively
very small. Mr. Cross, of Broomfield in Somersetshire,
kept a battery of this kind in full force during twelve
months. M. Becquerel had invented an instrument for comparing
the intensities of the different kinds of electricity by means
of weights; but, as it is impossible to make the comparison with
Voltaic electricity produced by the ordinary batteries, on account
of the perpetual variation to which the intensity of the current is
liable, he has constructed a battery which affords a continued
stream of electricity of uniform power, but it is also of very
feeble force. The current is produced by the chemical combination
of an acid with an alkali.
Metallic contact is not necessary for the production of Voltaic
electricity, which is entirely due to chemical action. The intensity
of the Voltaic electricity is in proportion to the intensity of
the affinities concerned in its production, and the quantity
produced is in proportion to the quantity of matter which has
been chemically active during its evolution. Dr. Faraday considers
this definite production to be one of the strongest proofs
that electricity is of chemical origin.
Galvanic or Voltaic electricity is manifested by two continuous
forces or currents passing in opposite directions through the
circuit: the zinc is the positive end or pole of the battery, and
the copper the negative.
Voltaic electricity is distinguished by two marked characters.
Its intensity increases with the number of plates, its quantity
with the extent of their surfaces. The most intense concentration
of force is displayed by a numerous series of large plates: light
and heat are copiously evolved, and chemical decomposition is
accomplished with extraordinary energy; whereas the electricity
from one pair of plates, whatever their size may be, is so feeble
301that it gives no sign either of attraction or repulsion. Common
or static electricity is of greater intensity and has a greater
power of overcoming resistance than Voltaic electricity, but it
acts upon a smaller quantity of matter. However, by diminishing
the size of the plates, and increasing their number, the intensity
of a battery may be increased till it becomes equal to that
of the electrical machine.
The action of Voltaic electricity differs in some respects
materially from that of the ordinary kind. When a quantity of
common electricity is accumulated, the restoration of equilibrium
is attended by an instantaneous violent explosion, accompanied
by the development of light, heat, and sound. The concentrated
power of the electricity forces its way through every obstacle, disrupting
and destroying the cohesion of the particles of the bodies
through which it passes, and occasionally increasing its destructive
effects by the conversion of fluids into steam from the intensity
of the momentary heat, as when trees are torn to pieces by a
stroke of lightning. Even the vivid light which marks the path
of the electricity is probably owing in part to the sudden compression
of the air and the rapidity of its passage. But the
instant equilibrium is restored by this energetic action the whole
is at an end. On the contrary, when an accumulation takes
place in a Voltaic battery, equilibrium is restored the moment
the circuit is completed. But so far is the electric stream from
being exhausted, that it continues to flow silently and invisibly
in an uninterrupted current supplied by a perpetual reproduction.
And, although its action on bodies is neither so sudden nor so
intense as that of common electricity, yet it acquires such power
from constant accumulation and continued action, that it ultimately
surpasses the energy of the other. The two kinds of
electricity differ in no circumstance more than in the development
of heat. Instead of a momentary evolution, the circulation of
the Voltaic electricity is accompanied by a continued development
of heat, lasting as long as the circuit is complete, without
producing either light or sound. Its intensity from a very powerful
battery is greater than that of any heat that can be obtained
by artificial means, so that it fuses substances which resist
the action of the most powerful furnaces. The temperature
of every part of a Voltaic battery itself is raised during its
activity. With the greater number of metals Mr. Grove
302found that the positive terminal or pole is hotter than the
negative.
According to Mr. Joule, the quantity of heat generated in a
unit of time is proportional to the strength of the current, and
when a galvanic current is employed in chemical analysis, the
heat in the entire circuit generated in a unit of time is equal to
the work expended in producing it, minus that employed in the
analysis. In fact, a current of electricity cannot pass through a
homogeneous conductor without generating heat in overcoming
resistance, an effect proved by Mr. Joule to be proportional to
the square of the force of the current, and the same in whatever
direction the current may be flowing. Any other thermal action
that can take place must depend upon the heterogeneousness of
the circuit, and must be reversible with the current. For example,
if a semicircle of bismuth be joined to a semicircle of antimony,
an electric current in passing through it produces cold
where it passes from the bismuth to the antimony by absorption,
and heat where it passes from the antimony to the bismuth.
The transit of the electricity from pole to pole is accompanied
by light, and in consequence of the continuous current sparks
occur every time the contact of the wires is either broken or renewed;
but considerable intensity is requisite to enable the
electricity to force its way through atmospheric air or gas. Both
its length and colour are affected by the density of the medium
through which it passes. If the medium be gradually rarefied
the discharge increases from a spark to a luminous glow, differing
in colour in different gases, but white in air. When very
much attenuated a discharge may be made to pass across 6 or 7
feet of space, while in air of the ordinary density it will not pass
through an inch. In rarefied gas it resembles the Aurora by its
continuous flashes. When the battery is powerful the luminous
effects are very brilliant.
The most splendid artificial light known is produced by
fixing pencils of charcoal at the extremities of the wires, and
bringing them into contact. This light is the more remarkable
as it is independent of combustion, since the charcoal
suffers no apparent change, and, likewise, because it is
equally vivid in such gases as do not contain oxygen. It
depends upon the molecular arrangement of the charcoal; for
Mr. Grove observes that “carbon in a transparent crystalline
303state, as diamond, is as perfect a non-conductor as we know, while
in an opaque amorphous state, as graphite or charcoal, it is one
of the best conductors: thus in one state it transmits light and
stops electricity, in the other it transmits electricity and stops
light. It is a circumstance worthy of remark, that the arrangement
of molecules which renders a solid body capable of transmitting
light is most unfavourable to the transmission of electricity,
transparent solids being very imperfect conductors of
electricity; so all gases readily transmit light, but are amongst
the worst conductors of electricity, if indeed they can be said to
conduct it at all. The fact that the molecular structure or
arrangement of a body influences, indeed I may say determines,
its conducting power, is by no means explained by the theory of
a fluid; but if electricity be only a transmission of force or
motion, the influence of the molecular state is just what would
be expected.”
Professor Wheatstone, by fixing metallic points at the extremities
of the wires or poles, has found that the appearance of the
spectrum of the voltaic arc or vivid flame that is seen between
the terminals of a battery, depends, as in static electricity, upon
the metal from whence it is taken. The spectrum of that from
mercury consists of seven definite rays, separated from each other
by dark intervals; these visible rays are two orange lines close
together, a bright green line, two blueish-green lines near each
other, a very bright purple line, and, lastly, a blue line. It is
the same when it passes through carbonic acid gas, oxygen gas,
air, or vacuum. The light from zinc, cadmium, tin, bismuth,
and lead, in a melted state, gives similar results; but the number,
position, and colour of the lines vary so much in each case, and the
appearances are so different, that the metals may easily be distinguished
from one another by this mode of investigation. The
electric spark is considered by M. Angström to be the overlapping
of two spectra, one of which belongs to the metal, and the other
to the gas through which the spark passes, and that the bright
lines vary with the gas as well as with the metal. In an oxygen
spectrum the greatest number of bright lines occur in the blue
and violet, in nitrogen in the green and yellow, and in hydrogen
in the red. These effects must necessarily be connected with
the chemical and thermal properties of the gases.
Mr. Grove considers that the colour of the voltaic arc, or flame,
304which appears between the poles of a very powerful battery,
depends upon the substance of the metal from whence it proceeds
and on the medium through which it passes. The spark from
zinc is blue, from silver it is green, from iron it is red and scintillating—precisely
the colours afforded by these metals in their
ordinary combustion. But the colour varies also with the
medium through which the light passes, for when the medium is
changed a change takes place in the colour, showing an affection
of the intervening matter. A portion of the metal terminals or
poles is actually transmitted with every electrical or Voltaic discharge,
whence Mr. Grove concludes that the electrical discharge
arises, at least in part, from an actual repulsion and severance of
the electrified matter itself, which flies off at the points of least
resistance. He observes that “the phenomena attending the
electric spark or Voltaic arc tends to modify considerably our
previous idea of the nature of the electric force as a producer of
ignition and combustion. The Voltaic arc is perhaps, strictly
speaking, neither ignition nor combustion. It is not simply
ignition; because the matter of the terminals is not merely
brought to a state of incandescence, but is physically separated,
and partially transferred from one terminal to another,
much of it being dissipated in a vaporous state. It is not combustion;
for the phenomena will take place independently of
atmospheric air, oxygen gas, or any of the bodies usually called
supporters of combustion; combustion being in fact chemical
union attended with heat and light. In the Voltaic arc we may
have no chemical union, for if the experiment be performed in an
exhausted receiver, or in nitrogen, the substance forming the
terminals is condensed and precipitated upon the interior of the
vessel, in, chemically speaking, an unaltered state. Thus, to
take a very striking example, if the Voltaic discharge be taken
between zinc terminals in an exhausted receiver, a fine black
powder of zinc is deposited on the sides of the receiver; this can
be collected, and takes fire readily in air by being touched with
a match, or ignited wire, instantly burning into white oxide of
zinc. To an ordinary observer the zinc would appear to be burned
twice—first in the receiver, where the phenomenon presents all
the appearance of combustion, and, secondly, in the real combustion
in air. With iron the experiment is equally instructive. Iron
is volatilized by the Voltaic arc in nitrogen, or in an exhausted
305receiver; and when a scarcely perceptible film has lined the
receiver, if it be washed with an acid, it then gives, with
ferrocyanide of potassium, the Prussian-blue precipitate. In this
case we readily distil iron, a metal by ordinary means fusible
only at a very high temperature.”
Another strong evidence that the Voltaic discharge consists of
the material itself of which the terminals are composed, is the
peculiar rotation which is observed in the light when iron is
employed, the magnetic character of this metal causing its particles
to rotate by the influence of the Voltaic current. In short,
Mr. Grove concludes that, although it would be hasty to assert
that the electrical disruptive discharge can in no case take place
without the terminals being affected, yet he had met with no
instance of such a result, provided the discharge had been sufficiently
prolonged, and the terminals in such a state as could be
expected to render manifest slight changes![15]
Some years ago Mr. Grove discovered that the electrical discharge
possesses certain phases or fits of an alternate character,
forming rings of alternate oxidation and deoxidation on metallic
surfaces. A highly polished silver plate in an air-pump was
connected with the pole of a powerful inductive battery, while a
fine metallic wire, or even a common sewing needle, was fixed at
the other pole, and so arranged as to be perpendicular to the
silver plate, and very near, but not touching it. By means of
this apparatus the electrical discharge could be sent through any
kind of rarefied media. In some of the experiments a series of
concentric coloured rings of oxide alternating with rings of
polished or unoxidated silver were formed on the plate under the
point of the needle or wire. When the plate was previously
coated with a film of oxide, the oxide was removed in concentric
spaces by the discharge, and increased on the alternate ones,
showing an alternate positive and negative electricity, or electricity
of an opposite character in the same discharge.
When the silver plate was polished the centre of the rings
formed on it was yellow-green surrounded by blue-green; then a
ring of polished silver, followed by a crimson ring with a slight
orange tint on the inner side and deep purple on the outer;
306lastly the indication of a polished one. When the air-pump was
filled with attenuated olefiant gas the rings were precisely the
same with those seen in thin plates; hence the effect is the same
as that produced by the interference of light. In these experiments
the luminous appearance extended from three quarters of
an inch to an inch round the point of the needle or wire.
When the silver plate was connected with the negative pole of
the battery a polished point appeared upon it opposite the needle,
surrounded by a dusky ill-defined areola of a brown colour tinged
with purple when viewed in one direction, and greenish-white
when seen in another.
In the present year Mr. Gassiot, Vice-President of the Royal
Society, has shown that the stratified character of the electric
discharge is remarkably developed in the Torricellian vacuum.
Among the various experiments made by that gentleman two
may be selected as strongly illustrative of this new and singular
property of electrical light.
In a closed glass tube about an inch internal diameter and 38
inches long, in which a vacuum had been made, two platinum
wires were hermetically sealed, 32 inches apart, and connected
with the poles of an inductive battery. The luminous appearance
at the two poles was very different when electricity passed
through the wires. A glow surrounded the negative pole, and in
close approximation to the glow a well-defined dark space appeared,
while from the positive pole or wire the light proceeded in a
stream; but unless the charge be great or the tube short, the
stream will not extend to the black band, which is totally different
from the intervening space. When discharges of electricity
were sent through this vacuum tube a series of bands or
stratifications were formed which were concave towards the positive
pole; and as in the changes in making and breaking the
circuit the electricity emanates from the different terminals or
wires, their concavities were in opposite directions.
When instead of platinum wires narrow tinfoil coatings were
placed round the exterior of the glass tube and connected with
the wires of the battery, brilliant stratifications filled the interior
of the tube between the foil coatings, but no dark band appeared.
At present Mr. Gassiot is inclined to believe that the dark band is
due to interference; but that the stratifications arise from pulsations
or impulses of a force acting in a highly attenuated but
307resisting medium, for even with the best air-pumps it is impossible
to make a perfect void; he is still occupied with experiments on
this new subject, and no doubt will obtain very remarkable
results, of which none can be more extraordinary than his discovery
of the powerful influence of the magnet on this electric
light. The stratifications are formed in rapid succession in the
tube with platinum wires and are turned different ways, but they
can be separated at any part of the tube by the pole of a magnet
round which the whole stratifications have a tendency to revolve.
In the second experiment, where the tinfoil was used, the discharge
was divided in two by the pole of a magnet, and the two parts had
a tendency to rotate round the magnet in opposite directions.
Voltaic electricity is a powerful agent in chemical analysis.
When transmitted through conducting fluids, it separates them
into their constituent parts, which it conveys in an invisible
state through a considerable space or quantity of liquid to the
poles, where they come into evidence. Numerous instances
might be given, but the decomposition of water is perhaps the
most simple and elegant. Suppose a glass tube filled with water,
and corked at both ends; if one of the wires of an active Voltaic
battery be made to pass through one cork, and the other through
the other cork, into the water, so that the extremities of the two
wires shall be opposite and about a quarter of an inch asunder,
chemical action will immediately take place, and gas will continue
to rise from the extremities of both wires till the water has
vanished. If an electric spark be then sent through the tube,
the water will reappear. By arranging the experiment so as to
have the gas given out by each wire separately, it is found that
water consists of two volumes of hydrogen and one of oxygen.
The hydrogen is given out at the positive wire of the battery,
and the oxygen at the negative. The oxides are also decomposed;
the oxygen appears at the positive pole, and the metal at the
negative. The decomposition of the alkalies and earths by Sir
Humphry Davy formed a remarkable era in the history of science.
Soda, potash, lime, magnesia, and other substances heretofore
considered to be simple bodies incapable of decomposition, were
resolved by electric agency into their constituent parts, and
proved to be metallic oxides, by that illustrious philosopher. All
chemical changes produced by electricity are accomplished on
the same principle; and it appears that, in general, combustible
308substances, metals, and alkalies go to the negative wire, while
acids and oxygen are evolved at the positive. The transfer of
these substances to the poles is not the least wonderful effect of
the Voltaic battery. Though the poles be at a considerable distance
from one another, nay, even in separate vessels, if a communication
be only established by a quantity of wet thread, as
the decomposition proceeds the component parts pass through
the thread in an invisible state, and arrange themselves at their
respective poles. According to Dr. Faraday, electro-chemical
decomposition is simply a case of the preponderance of one set
of chemical affinities more powerful in their nature over another
set which are less powerful. And in electro-chemical action of
any kind produced by a continuous current, the amount of action
in a given time is nearly, if not rigorously, proportional to the
strength of the current. The great efficacy of Voltaic electricity
in chemical decomposition arises not from its tension, but from
the quantity set in motion and the continuance of its action. Its
agency appears to be most exerted on fluids and substances
which by conveying the electricity partially and imperfectly
impede its progress. But it is now proved to be as efficacious
in the composition as in the decomposition or analysis of bodies.
It had been observed that, when metallic solutions are subjected
to galvanic action, a deposition of metal, sometimes in the
form of minute crystals, takes place on the negative wire. By
extending this principle, and employing a very feeble Voltaic
action, M. Becquerel has succeeded in forming crystals of a great
proportion of the mineral substances, precisely similar to those
produced by nature. The electric state of metallic veins makes
it possible that many natural crystals may have taken their form
from the action of electricity bringing their ultimate particles,
when in solution, within the narrow sphere of molecular attraction.
Both light and motion favour crystallization. Crystals
which form in different liquids are generally more abundant on
the side of the jar exposed to the light; and it is well known
that still water, cooled below 32°, starts into crystals of ice the
instant it is agitated. A feeble action is alone necessary, provided
it be continued for a sufficient time. Crystals formed
rapidly are generally imperfect and soft, and M. Becquerel found
that even years of constant Voltaic action were necessary for the
309crystallization of some of the hard substances. If this law be
general, how many ages may be required for the formation of a
diamond!
The deposition of metal from a metallic solution by galvanic
electricity has been most successfully applied to the arts of plating
and gilding, as well as to the more delicate process of copying
medals and copper plates. Indeed, not medals only, but any
object of art or nature, may be coated with precipitated metal,
provided it be first covered with the thinnest film of plumbago,
which renders a non-conductor sufficiently conducting to receive
the metal. Photo-galvanic engraving depends upon this. Gelatine
mixed with bichromate of potash, nitrate of silver, and iodide of
potassium, is spread over a plate of glass, and when dry a positive
print is laid upon it with its face downwards, which, when exposed
to the sun, leaves its impression. When soaked in water the
gelatine swells around all those parts where the light had fallen,
thus forming an intaglio, a cast of which is taken in gutta-percha,
which is then coated with copper by the electro process, whence a
copper plate in relief is obtained.
Static electricity, on account of its high tension, passes through
water and other liquids as soon as it is formed, whatever the
length of its course may be. Voltaic electricity, on the contrary,
is weakened by the distance it has to traverse. Pure water is a
very bad conductor; but ice absolutely stops a current of Voltaic
electricity altogether, whatever be the power of the battery,
although static or common electricity has sufficient power to
overcome its resistance. Dr. Faraday has discovered that this
property is not peculiar to ice; that, with a few exceptions,
bodies which do not conduct electricity when solid acquire that
property, and are immediately decomposed, when they become
fluid, and, in general, that decomposition takes place as soon as
the solution acquires the capacity of conduction, which has led
him to suspect that the power of conduction may be only a consequence
of decomposition.
Heat increases the conducting power of some substances for
Voltaic electricity, and of the gases for both kinds. Dr. Faraday
has given a new proof of the connexion between heat and electricity,
by showing that, in general, when a solid, which is not a
metal, becomes fluid, it almost entirely loses its power of conducting
310heat, while it acquires a capacity for conducting electricity
in a high degree. M. Becquerel regards the production
of heat and that of electricity to be concomitant; their dependence
being such, that when one is increased the other diminishes,
and vice versâ, so that one may altogether disappear with the
increase of the other. For instance, when electricity circulates
in a metallic wire, the greater the heat produced, the less the
quantity of electricity which passes, and the contrary, so that
the affair proceeds as if electricity were converted into heat, and
heat into electricity. Again, in a closed galvanic circuit the
sum of the heat produced in the chemical action of the acidulated
water upon the zinc and in the conducting wire is constant, so
that the quantity of heat disengaged in the reaction is greater in
proportion as less electricity passes through the wire. These,
and other circumstances, prove such an intimate connexion between
the production of heat and electricity, that in the change
of condition of substances the electrical effects might disappear
or be annulled by the calorific effects.
The galvanic current affects all the senses: nothing can be
more disagreeable than the shock, which may even be fatal if the
battery be very powerful. A bright flash of light is perceived
with the eyes shut, when one of the wires touches the face, and
the other the hand. By touching the ear with one wire, and
holding the other, strange noises are heard; and an acid taste is
perceived when the positive wire is applied to the tip of the
tongue, and the negative wire touches some other part of it.
By reversing the poles the taste becomes alkaline. It renders
the pale light of the glow-worm more intense. Dead animals
are roused by it, as if they started again into life, and it may
ultimately prove to be the cause of muscular action in the
living.
Several fish possess the faculty of producing electrical effects.
The most remarkable are the gymnotus electricus, found in South
America; and the torpedo, a genus of ray, frequent in the
Mediterranean. The electrical action of the torpedo depends
upon an apparatus apparently analogous to the Voltaic pile,
which the animal has the power of charging at will, consisting of
membranous columns filled throughout with laminæ, separated
from one another by a fluid. The absolute quantity of electricity
brought into circulation by the torpedo is so great, that it effects
311the decomposition of water, has power sufficient to make magnets,
gives very severe shocks and the electric spark. It is identical
in kind with that of the galvanic battery, the electricity of the
under surface of the fish being the same with the negative pole,
and that in the upper surface the same with the positive pole.
Its manner of action is, however, somewhat different; for,
although the evolution of the electricity is continued for a sensible
time, it is interrupted, being communicated by a succession
of discharges.</div></body></text></TEI>