<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="23">
186
SECTION XXII.

Phenomena exhibited by the Passage of Polarized Light through Mica and
Sulphate of Lime—The Coloured Images produced by Polarized Light
passing through Crystals having one and two Optic Axes—Circular
Polarization—Elliptical Polarization—Discoveries of MM. Biot, Fresnel,
and Professor Airy—Coloured Images produced by the Interference of
Polarized Rays—Fluorescence.
Such is the nature of polarized light and of the laws it follows.
But it is hardly possible to convey an idea of the splendour of the
phenomena it exhibits under circumstances which an attempt
will now be made to describe.
If light polarized by reflection from a pane of glass be viewed
through a plate of tourmaline, with its longitudinal section
vertical, an obscure cloud, with its centre totally dark, will be
seen on the glass. Now, let a plate of mica, uniformly about the
thirtieth of an inch in thickness, be interposed between the
tourmaline and the glass; the dark spot will instantly vanish,
and, instead of it, a succession of the most gorgeous colours will
appear, varying with every inclination of the mica, from the
richest reds, to the most vivid greens, blues, and purples
(N. 211). That they may be seen in perfection, the mica must
revolve at right angles to its own plane. When the mica is
turned round in a plane perpendicular to the polarized ray, it
will be found that there are two lines in it where the colours
entirely vanish. These are the optic axes of the mica, which is
a doubly refracting substance, with two optic axes, along which
light is refracted in one pencil.
No colours are visible in the mica, whatever its position may
be with regard to the polarized light, without the aid of the
tourmaline, which separates the transmitted ray into two
pencils of coloured light complementary to one another, that is,
which taken together would make white light. One of these
it absorbs, and transmits the other; it is therefore called the
analyzing plate. The truth of this will appear more readily if a
film of sulphate of lime, between the twentieth and sixtieth of
187an inch thick, be used instead of the mica. When the film is
of uniform thickness, only one colour will be seen when it is
placed between the analyzing plate and the reflecting glass; as,
for example, red. But, when the tourmaline revolves, the red
will vanish by degrees till the film is colourless; then it will
assume a green hue, which will increase and arrive at its maximum
when the tourmaline has turned through ninety degrees;
after that, the green will vanish and the red will reappear,
alternating at each quadrant. Thus the tourmaline separates the
light which has passed through the film into a red and a green
pencil; in one position it absorbs the green and lets the red pass,
and in another it absorbs the red and transmits the green. This
is proved by analyzing the ray with Iceland spar instead of
tourmaline; for, since the spar does not absorb the light, two
images of the sulphate of lime will be seen, one red and the
other green; and these exchange colours every quarter revolution
of the spar, the red becoming green, and the green red; and,
where the images overlap, the colour is white, proving the red
and green to be complementary to each other. The tint depends
on the thickness of the film. Films of sulphate of lime, the
0·00124 and 0·01818 of an inch respectively, give white light in
whatever position they may be held, provided they be perpendicular
to the polarized ray; but films of intermediate thickness
will give all colours. Consequently, a wedge of sulphate of lime,
varying in thickness between the 0·00124 and the 0·01818 of an
inch, will appear to be striped with all colours when polarized
light is transmitted through it. A change in the inclination of
the film, whether of mica or sulphate of lime, is evidently equivalent
to a variation in thickness.
When a plate of mica, held as close to the eye as possible, at
such an inclination as to transmit the polarized ray along one of
its optic axes, is viewed through the tourmaline with its axis
vertical, a most splendid appearance is presented. The cloudy
spot in the direction of the optic axis is seen surrounded by a set
of vividly coloured rings of an oval form, divided into two
unequal parts by a black curved band passing through the cloudy
spot about which the rings are formed. The other optic axis of
the mica exhibits a similar image (N. 212).
When the two optic axes of a crystal make a small angle with
one another, as in nitre, the two sets of rings touch externally;
188and, if the plate of nitre be turned round in its own plane, the
black transverse bands undergo a variety of changes, till, at last,
the whole richly coloured image assumes the form of the figure 8,
traversed by a black cross (N. 213). Substances with one optic
axis have but one set of coloured circular rings, with a broad
black cross passing through its centre, dividing the rings into
four equal parts. When the analyzing plate revolves, this figure
recurs at every quarter revolution; but in the intermediate positions
it assumes the complementary colours, the black cross
becoming white.
It is in vain to attempt to describe the beautiful phenomena
exhibited by innumerable bodies which undergo periodic changes
in form and colour when the analyzing plate revolves, but not
one of them shows a trace of colour without the aid of tourmaline,
or something equivalent, to analyze the light, and as it were to
call these beautiful phantoms into existence. Tourmaline has
the disadvantage of being itself a coloured substance; but that
inconvenience may be obviated by employing a reflecting surface
as an analyzing plate. When polarized light is reflected by a
plate of glass at the polarizing angle, it will be separated into two
coloured pencils; and, when the analyzing plate is turned round
in its own plane, it will alternately reflect each ray at every
quarter revolution, so that all the phenomena that have been
described will be seen by reflection on its surface.
Coloured rings are produced by analyzing polarized light
transmitted through glass melted and suddenly or unequally
cooled; also through thin plates of glass bent with the hand, jelly
indurated or compressed, &c. &c. In short, all the phenomena
of coloured rings may be produced, either permanently or transiently,
in a variety of substances, by heat and cold, rapid cooling,
compression, dilatation, and induration; and so little apparatus
is necessary for performing the experiments, that, as Sir John
Herschel says, a piece of window glass or a polished table to
polarize the light, a sheet of clear ice to produce the rings, and a
broken fragment of plate-glass placed near the eye to analyze the
light, are alone requisite to produce one of the most splendid of
optical exhibitions.
Pressure produces remarkable changes in the optical properties
of crystals. Compression, perpendicular to the axis, transforms
a crystal with one optic axis into one with two. A slice of
189quartz and one of beryl, both cut perpendicularly to their axis,
were compressed thus by MM. Moignot and Soleil. They
found that the single system in the quartz, which is a positive
crystal, was doubled in the direction of the compression, while
in the beryl, which is a negative crystal, the duplication was
perpendicular to the compression. In the quartz the axis of the
double system coincided with the line of pressure, but in the
tourmaline, which is a negative crystal, the line which joins the
centres of the rings was perpendicular to the pressure.
If a positive crystal be compressed in the direction of its axis
the tint of the rings descends, and that of a negative crystal
rises. But if the crystals be dilated in the direction of their
optic axis, the tints in positive crystals rise, and negative
descend.
It has been observed, that when a ray of light, polarized by
reflection from any surface not metallic, is analyzed by a doubly
refracting substance, it exhibits properties which are symmetrical
both to the right and left of the plane of reflection, and the ray
is then said to be polarized according to that plane. This symmetry
is not destroyed when the ray, before being analyzed,
traverses the optic axis of a crystal having but one optic axis, as
evidently appears from the circular forms of the coloured rings
already described. Regularly crystallized quartz, however, forms
an exception. In it, even though the rays should pass through
the optic axis itself, where there is no double refraction, the
primitive symmetry of the ray is destroyed, and the plane of
primitive polarization deviates either to the right or left of the
observer, by an angle proportional to the thickness of the plate
of quartz. This angular motion, or true rotation of the plane of
polarization, which is called circular polarization, is clearly
proved by the phenomena. The coloured rings produced by all
crystals having but one optic axis are circular, and traversed by
a black cross concentric with the rings; so that the light entirely
vanishes throughout the space enclosed by the interior ring,
because there is neither double refraction nor polarization along
the optic axis. But in the system of rings produced by a plate
of quartz, whose surfaces are perpendicular to the axis of the
crystal, the part within the interior ring, instead of being void of
light, is occupied by a uniform tint of red, green, or blue,
according to the thickness of the plate (N. 214). Suppose the
190plate of quartz to be
1⁄25
of an inch thick, which will give the red
tint to the space within the interior ring; when the analyzing
plate is turned, in its own plane through an angle of
171⁄2°,
the
red hue vanishes. If a plate of rock crystal
2⁄25
of an inch thick
be used, the analyzing plate must revolve through 35° before
the red tint vanishes, and so on, every additional 25th of an inch
in thickness requiring an additional rotation of
171⁄2°;
whence it
is manifest that the plane of polarization revolves in the direction
of a spiral within the rock crystal. It is remarkable that, in some
crystals of quartz, the plane of polarization revolves from right to
left, and in others from left to right, although the crystals themselves
differ apparently only by a very slight, almost imperceptible,
variety in form. In these phenomena the rotation to
the right is accomplished according to the same laws, and with
the same energy, as that to the left. But if two plates of quartz
be interposed, which possess different affections, the second plate
undoes, either wholly or partly, the rotatory motion which the
first had produced, according as the plates are of equal or unequal
thickness. When the plates are of unequal thickness, the deviation
is in the direction of the strongest, and exactly the same
with that which a third plate would produce equal in thickness
to the difference of the two.
M. Biot has discovered the same properties in a variety of
liquids. Oil of turpentine, and an essential oil of laurel, cause
the plane of polarization to turn to the left, whereas the syrup
of sugar-cane, and a solution of natural camphor, by alcohol, turn
it to the right. A compensation is effected by the superposition
or mixture of two liquids which possess these opposite properties,
provided no chemical action takes place. A remarkable difference
was also observed by M. Biot between the action of the
particles of the same substances when in a liquid or solid state.
The syrup of grapes, for example, turns the plane of polarization
to the left as long as it remains liquid; but, as soon as it
acquires the solid form of sugar, it causes the plane of polarization
to revolve towards the right, a property which it retains
even when again dissolved. Instances occur also in which these
circumstances are reversed.
A ray of light passing through a liquid possessing the power
of circular polarization is not affected by mixing other fluids
with the liquid—such as water, ether, alcohol, &c.—which
191do not possess circular polarization themselves, the angle of
deviation remaining exactly the same as before the mixture.
Whence M. Biot infers that the action exercised by the liquids
in question does not depend upon their mass, but that it is a
molecular action exercised by the ultimate particles of matter,
which depends solely upon the individual constitution, and is
entirely independent of the positions and mutual distances of
the particles with regard to each other. These important discoveries
show that circular polarization surpasses the power of
chemical analysis in giving certain and direct evidence of the
similarity or difference existing in the molecular constitution of
bodies, as well as of the permanency of that constitution, or of
the fluctuations to which it may be liable. For example, no
chemical difference has been discovered between syrup from the
sugar-cane and syrup from grapes. Yet the first causes the
plane of polarization to revolve to the right, and the other to
the left; therefore some essential difference must exist in the
nature of their ultimate molecules. The same difference is to
be traced between the juices of such plants as give sugar similar
to that from the cane, and those which give sugar like that
obtained from grapes.
If chlorate of soda be dissolved in water, the liquid has no
circular polarization; but if the solution be allowed to crystallize,
some of the crystals turn the light to the right and others to the
left. Now, if all those of one kind be gathered together and
dissolved a second time, the liquid will have no circular polarization;
but if crystals be allowed to form, some will turn the light
to the right and others to the left, although only one kind was
dissolved.[11]
It is a fact established by M. Biot, that in circular polarization
the laws of rotation followed by the different simple rays of
light are dissimilar in different substances. Whence he infers
that the deviation of the simple rays from one another ought
not to result from a special property of the luminous principle
only, but that the proper action of the molecules must also concur
in modifying the deviations of the simple rays differently in
different substances.
One of the many brilliant discoveries of M. Fresnel is the production
192of circular and elliptical polarization by the internal
reflection of light from plate-glass. He has shown that, if light
polarized by any of the usual methods be twice reflected within
a glass rhomb (N. 169) of a given form, the vibrations of the
ether that are perpendicular to the plane of incidence will be
retarded a quarter of a vibration, which causes the vibrating
particles to describe circles, and the succession of such vibrating
particles throughout the extent of a wave to form altogether a
circular helix, or curve like a corkscrew. However, that only
happens when the plane of polarization is inclined at an angle of
45° to the plane of incidence. When these two planes form an
angle either greater or less, the succession of vibrating particles
forms an elliptical helix, which curve may be represented by
twisting a thread in a spiral about an oval rod. These curves
will turn to the right or left, according to the position of the
incident plane.
The motion of the ethereal medium in elliptical and circular
polarization may be represented by the analogy of a stretched
cord; for, if the extremity of such a cord be agitated at equal
and regular intervals by a vibratory motion entirely confined to
one plane, the cord will be thrown into an undulating curve
lying wholly in that plane. If to this motion there be superadded
another similar and equal, but perpendicular to the first,
the cord will assume the form of an elliptical helix; its extremity
will describe an ellipse, and every molecule throughout
its length will successively do the same. But, if the second
system of vibrations commence exactly a quarter of an undulation
later than the first, the cord will take the form of a circular
helix or corkscrew, the extremity will move uniformly in a
circle, and every molecule throughout the cord will do the same
in succession. It appears, therefore, that both circular and elliptical
polarization may be produced by the composition of the
motions of two rays in which the particles of ether vibrate in
planes at right angles to one another.
Professor Airy, in a very profound and able paper published
in the Cambridge Transactions, has proved that all the different
kinds of polarized light are obtained from rock crystal. When
polarized light is transmitted through the axis of a crystal of
quartz, in the emergent ray the particles of ether move in a
circular helix; and when it is transmitted obliquely so as to
193form an angle with the axis of the prism, the particles of ether
move in an elliptical helix, the ellipticity increasing with the
obliquity of the incident ray; so that, when the incident ray
falls perpendicularly to the axis, the particles of ether move in a
straight line. Thus quartz exhibits every variety of elliptical
polarization, even including the extreme cases where the excentricity
is zero, or equal to the greater axis of the ellipse (N. 215).
In many crystals the two rays are so little separated, that it is
only from the nature of the transmitted light that they are known
to have the property of double refraction. M. Fresnel discovered,
by experiments on the properties of light passing through the axis
of quartz, that it consists of two superposed rays, moving with
different velocities; and Professor Airy has shown that in these
two rays the molecules of ether vibrate in similar ellipses at
right angles to each other, but in different directions; that their
ellipticity varies with the angle which the incident ray makes
with the axis; and that, by the composition of their motions,
they produce all the phenomena of polarized light observed in
quartz.
It appears, from what has been said, that the molecules of
ether always perform their vibrations at right angles to the
direction of the ray, but very differently in the various kinds of
light. In natural light the vibrations are rectilinear, and in
every plane. In ordinary polarized light they are rectilinear,
but confined to one plane; in circular polarization the vibrations
are circular; and in elliptical polarization the molecules vibrate
in ellipses. These vibrations are communicated from molecule
to molecule, in straight lines when they are rectilinear, in a
circular helix when they are circular, and in an oval or elliptical
helix when elliptical.
Some fluids possess the property of circular polarization naturally,
as oil of turpentine, the essential oils of laurel and lemon,
sugar of grapes, and various liquids.
Elliptical polarization is produced by reflection from metallic
surfaces. Mr. Baden Powell discovered it also in the light reflected
from China ink, chromate of lead, plumbago, &c. Mr.
Airy observed that the light reflected from the diamond is elliptically
polarized; and Mr. Jamin has shown that this kind of
polarization is generally produced by reflection from almost all
transparent bodies, whatever their refractive power may be,
194especially from glass at angles very little different from the law
of the tangents.
Water polarizes light circularly when between the points of
maximum density and solidification; hence it becomes crystalline.
The coloured images from polarized light arise from the interference
of the rays (N. 216). MM. Fresnel and Arago found
that two rays of polarized light interfere and produce coloured
fringes if they be polarized in the same plane, but that they do
not interfere when polarized in different planes. In all intermediate
positions, fringes of intermediate brightness are produced.
The analogy of a stretched cord will show how this happens.
Suppose the cord to be moved backwards and forwards horizontally
at equal intervals; it will be thrown into an undulating
curve lying all in one plane. If to this motion there be superadded
another similar and equal, commencing exactly half an
undulation later than the first, it is evident that the direct motion
every molecule will assume, in consequence of the first system
of waves, will at every instant be exactly neutralized by the
retrograde motion it would take in virtue of the second; and the
cord itself will be quiescent in consequence of the interference.
But, if the second system of waves be in a plane perpendicular
to the first, the effect would only be to twist the rope, so that no
interference would take place. Rays polarized at right angles
to each other may subsequently be brought into the same plane
without acquiring the property of producing coloured fringes;
but, if they belong to a pencil the whole of which was originally
polarized in the same plane, they will interfere.
The manner in which the coloured images are formed may
be conceived by considering that, when polarized light passes
through the optic axis of a doubly refracting substance,—as
mica, for example,—it is divided into two pencils by the analyzing
tourmaline; and, as one ray is absorbed, there can be no
interference. But, when polarized light passes through the mica
in any other direction, it is separated into two white rays, and
these are again divided into four pencils by the tourmaline,
which absorbs two of them; and the other two, being transmitted
in the same plane with different velocities, interfere and
produce the coloured phenomena. If the analysis be made with
Iceland spar, the single ray passing through the optic axis of the
mica will be refracted into two rays, polarized in different planes,
195and no interference will happen. But, when two rays are transmitted
by the mica, they will be separated into four by the spar,
two of which will interfere to form one image, and the other two,
by their interference, will produce the complementary colours of
the other image when the spar has revolved through 90°; because,
in such positions of the spar as produce the coloured
images, only two rays are visible at a time, the other two being
reflected. When the analysis is accomplished by reflection, if
two rays are transmitted by the mica, they are polarized in
planes at right angles to each other. And, if the plane of reflection
of either of these rays be at right angles to the plane of
polarization, only one of them will be reflected, and therefore no
interference can take place; but in all other positions of the
analyzing plate both rays will be reflected in the same plane, and
consequently will produce coloured rings by their interference.
It is evident that a great deal of the light we see must be
polarized, since most bodies which have the power of reflecting
or refracting light also have the power of polarizing it. The
blue light of the sky is completely polarized at an angle of 74°
from the sun in a plane passing through his centre.
A constellation of talent almost unrivalled at any period in
the history of science has contributed to the theory of polarization,
though the original discovery of that property of light was
accidental, and arose from an occurrence which, like thousands
of others, would have passed unnoticed had it not happened to
one of those rare minds capable of drawing the most important
inferences from circumstances apparently trifling. In 1808,
while M. Malus was accidentally viewing with a doubly-refracting
prism a brilliant sunset reflected from the windows of
the Luxembourg Palace in Paris, on turning the prism slowly
round, he was surprised to see a very great difference in the intensity
of the two images, the most refracted alternately changing
from brightness to obscurity at each quadrant of revolution. A
phenomenon so unlooked for induced him to investigate its
cause, whence sprung one of the most elegant and refined
branches of physical optics.
Fluorescence, or the internal dispersion of light, though far from
possessing the beauty or extensive consequences of polarized light,
is scarcely less wonderful. A variety of substances, such as
canary-glass, a solution of sulphate of quinine, fluor-spar, and
196a great number of organic substances, have the property of
diminishing the refrangibility of light by internal dispersion,
consequently of increasing the length of the waves, and lowering
the colour in the prismatic scale; it is therefore called degraded
light, or fluorescence, because first discovered in fluor-spar.
If a piece of glass coloured by cobalt be fixed in a hole in a
window-shutter of a dark room, a slab of white porcelain placed
near it will appear blue; but if the slab be viewed through a
yellow glass coloured by silver, it will appear to be almost quite
black, because the yellow glass absorbs all the rays transmitted
by the blue glass. If, however, a piece of canary-glass be laid
on the slab while it is dark, every part of the canary-glass will
shine as if it were self-luminous, and with so bright a light that
anything written on the slab that was invisible before may now
be distinctly read. Such is the singular phenomenon of internal
dispersion, degraded light, or fluorescence. The brightness is
by no means due to phosphorescence, because the canary-glass
only shines when under the influence of the active or blue rays,
whereas phosphorescent bodies shine by their own light—the
latter has independent, the former dependent, emission; it is
possible, however, that a connexion may hereafter be traced between
them.
It appears from the analytical investigation of this phenomenon
that the vibrations of the fluorescent substance are analogous
to those of a sonorous body, as a bell or musical cord,
which give the fundamental note and its harmonics. Now since
there is a reciprocal action between the molecules of matter and
light, when the light of the sun is absorbed by a substance
capable of fluorescence, it puts the whole of its molecules into
vibrations the same as its own, analogous to the fundamental
note, while at the same time a certain number of molecules take
more rapid vibrations exactly like the harmonics. The latter
form new centres of light throughout the substance, which
impart their vibrations to the ethereal medium around, and constitute
fluorescence or degraded light. For example, in the
experiment that has been described, the blue light imparted its
own vibrations to all the molecules of the canary-glass, and also
more rapid vibrations to a certain number of them. All of the
blue rays were excluded by the yellow glass held before the eye;
but it was pervious to the rays emanating in more rapid vibrations
197from the smaller number of molecules, which thus became
really new centres of light, different from the sun’s light, though
owing to it; the one celestial, the other terrestrial; and the latter
vibrations being more rapid than those of the blue light, their refrangibility
was less, and therefore their colour lower in the prismatic
scale. Mr. Power computed from his formulæ, that fluorescent
light is produced by undulations which are a major or
minor third below the pitch of the general vibration of the
medium—that is to say, below the vibrations which the whole
molecules of the body most readily assume.
Professor Stokes, of Cambridge, who made the preceding experiment,
found that the chemical rays from a point in the
solar spectrum produced, in a solution of the sulphate of quinine,
light of a sky-blue colour, which emanates in all directions
from the liquid, and that this blue fluorescent light contains,
when analysed, all the rays of the spectrum; hence he inferred
that the dispersive power or fluorescence had lowered the refrangibility
of the chemical rays, so as to make them visible:
and Sir David Brewster observes that the new spectrum, of all
colours into which they were transformed, must possess the
extraordinary property of being a luminous spectrum, either
without chemical rays or full of them. The dispersion in the
quinine solution is greatest near the surface, but the blue emanation
proceeds from every part of the liquid; and Sir John
Herschel, who discovered the fluorescent property in this liquid,
and gave it the name of epipolic light, found that the remainder
of the beam, when it issued from the solution, though not
apparently different from the incident white light, is yet so
much changed in passing through the liquid, that it is no longer
capable of producing fluorescence, though still capable of common
dispersion. The blue light from the solution of quinine, when
examined, consisted of rays extending over a great part of the
spectrum.
By passing a sunbeam through a bluish kind of fluor-spar,
Sir David Brewster perceived that the blue colour is not superficial,
as it appears to be, but that some veins in the interior of
the crystal disperse blue light, others pink, and even white
light; in short, he met with fluorescence in such a variety of
substances, that he concludes it may prevail more or less in the
greater number of solids and liquids.
198Professor Draper, of New York, proved that the result is the
same whether the incident light be polarized or not, and that
the dispersed or degraded light is never polarized, but that it
emanates in all directions, as if the substance were self-luminous;
he made experiments with light from all parts of the solar
spectrum, and with various substances, and always found that
the refrangibility of the incident ray was diminished by internal
dispersion, and that the colour was changed to suit the new refrangibility.
Professor Draper has also shown that the law of
action and reaction prevails in all the phenomena of the sunbeam,
as in every other department of nature; so that a beam cannot
be reflected, refracted, much less absorbed, without producing
some change upon the recipient medium; and Mr. Power proved
analytically that the solar rays can exercise no action upon any
medium through which they are transmitted, without being
accompanied by a diminution of refraction. He says, “The
new light emanating from the fluorescent media is just like any
other light of the same prismatic composition. In its physical
properties it retains no trace of its parentage; it is of terrestrial
origin, and its colour depends simply on its new refrangibility,
having nothing to do with that of the producing rays, nor to the
circumstance of their belonging to the visible or invisible part
of the spectrum.” These phenomena can only be explained by
the undulatory theory of light.</div></body></text></TEI>