<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="36">
358
SECTION XXXV.

Ethereal Medium—Comets—Do not disturb the Solar System—Their
Orbits and Disturbances—M. Faye’s Comet probably the same with
Lexel’s—Periods of other three known—Acceleration in the mean
Motions of Encke’s and Biela’s Comets—The Shock of a Comet—Disturbing
Action of the Earth and Planets on Encke’s and Biela’s Comets—Velocity
of Comets—The Comet of 1264—The great Comet of
1343—Physical Constitution—Shine by borrowed Light—Estimation
of their Number.
In considering the constitution of the earth, and the fluids which
surround it, various subjects have presented themselves to our
notice, of which some, for aught we know, are confined to the
planet we inhabit; some are common to it and to the other bodies
of our system. But an all-pervading ether must fill the whole
visible creation, since it conveys, in the form of light, tremors
which may have been excited in the deepest recesses of the
universe thousands of years before we were called into being.
The existence of such a medium, though at first hypothetical, is
proved by the undulatory theory of light, and rendered certain
by the motion of comets, and by its action upon the vapours of
which they are chiefly composed. It has often been imagined
that the tails of comets have infused new substances into our
atmosphere. Possibly the earth may attract some of that
nebulous matter, since the vapours raised by the sun’s heat,
when the comets are in perihelio, and which form their tails, are
scattered through space in their passage to their aphelion; but it
has hitherto produced no effect, nor have the seasons ever been
influenced by these bodies. The light of the comet of the year
1811, which was so brilliant, did not impart any heat even when
condensed on the bulb of a thermometer of a structure so delicate
that it would have made the hundredth part of a degree evident.
In all probability, the tails of comets may have passed over the
earth without its inhabitants being conscious of their presence;
and there is reason to believe that the tail of the great comet of
1843 did so. M. Valz observed that the light of a brilliant
359comet was eclipsed as it passed over a star of the 7th magnitude,
whence M. Babinet computed that the light of the comet must
have been sixty times less than that of the star, and that
matter so attenuated could not penetrate the earth’s atmosphere,
but the constitution of these bodies is still a matter of conjecture.
The passage of comets has never sensibly disturbed the stability
of the solar system; their nucleus, being in general only a mass of
vapour, is so rare, and their transit so rapid, even when they had
a solid part, that the time has not been long enough to admit of a
sufficient accumulation of impetus to produce a perceptible action.
Indeed, M. Dusejour has shown that, under the most favourable
circumstances, a comet cannot remain longer than two hours and
a half at a less distance from the earth than 10,500 leagues. The
comet of 1770 passed within about six times the distance of the
moon from the earth, without even affecting our tides. According
to La Place, the action of the earth on the comet of 1770 augmented
the period of its revolution by more than two days; and,
if comets had any perceptible disturbing energy, the reaction of
the comet ought to have increased the length of our year. Had the
mass of that comet been equal to the mass of the earth, its disturbing
action would have increased the length of the sidereal year by
2h 53m; but, as Delambre’s computations from the Greenwich
observations of the sun show that the length of the year has not
been increased by the fraction of a second, its mass could not
have been equal to the
1⁄5000th
part of that of the earth. This
accounts for the same comet having twice swept through the
system of Jupiter’s satellites without deranging the motion of
these moons. M. Dusejour has computed that a comet, equal in
mass to the earth, passing at the distance of 12,150 leagues from
our planet, would increase the length of the year to 367d 16h 5m,
and the obliquity of the ecliptic as much as 2°. So the principal
action of comets would be to alter the calendar, even if they were
dense enough to affect the earth.
Comets traverse all parts of the heavens; their paths have
every possible inclination to the plane of the ecliptic, and, unlike
the planets, the motion of more than half of those that have
appeared has been retrograde, that is, from east to west. They
are only visible when near their perihelia; then their velocity is
such, that its square is twice as great as that of a body moving
in a circle at the same distance: they consequently remain but a
360very short time within the planetary orbits. And, as all the
conic sections of the same focal distance sensibly coincide, through
a small arc, on each side of the extremity of their axis, it is difficult
to ascertain in which of these curves the comets move, from
observations made, as they necessarily must be, near their perihelia
(N. 227). Probably they all move in extremely excentric
ellipses; although, in most cases, the parabolic curve coincides
most nearly with their observed motions. Some few seem to
describe hyperbolas; such, being once visible to us, would vanish
for ever, to wander through boundless space, to the remote
systems of the universe. If a planet be supposed to revolve in a
circular orbit, whose radius is equal to the perihelion distance of
a comet moving in a parabola, the areas described by these two
bodies in the same time will be as unity to the square root of
two, which forms such a connexion between the motion of comets
and planets, that, by Kepler’s law, the ratio of the areas described
during the same time by the comet and the earth may be found;
so that the place of a comet may be computed at any time in its
parabolic orbit, estimated from the instant of its passage at the
perihelion. It is a problem of very great difficulty to determine
all the other elements of parabolic motion—namely, the comet’s
perihelion distance, or shortest distance from the sun, estimated
in parts of the mean distance of the earth from the sun; the
longitude of the perihelion; the inclination of the orbit on the
plane of the ecliptic; and the longitude of the ascending node.
Three observed longitudes and latitudes of a comet are sufficient
for computing the approximate values of these quantities; but
an accurate estimation of them can only be obtained by successive
corrections, from a number of observations, distant from one
another. When the motion of a comet is retrograde, the place of
the ascending node is exactly opposite to what it is when the
motion is direct. Hence the place of the ascending node, together
with the direction of the comet’s motion, show whether the
inclination of the orbit is on the north or south side of the plane
of the ecliptic. If the motion be direct, the inclination is on the
north side; if retrograde, it is on the south side.
The identity of the elements is the only proof of the return of
a comet to our system. Should the elements of a new comet be
the same, or nearly the same, with those of any one previously
known, the probability of the identity of the two bodies is very
361great, since the similarity extends to no less than four elements,
every one of which is capable of an infinity of variations. But,
even if the orbit be determined with all the accuracy the case
admits of, it may be difficult, or even impossible, to recognize a
comet on its return, because its orbit would be very much
changed if it passed near any of the large planets of this or of
any other system, in consequence of their disturbing energy,
which would be very great on bodies of so rare a nature.
By far the most curious and interesting instance of the disturbing
action of the great bodies of our system is found in the comet
of 1770. The elements of its orbit, determined by Messier, did
not agree with those of any comet that had hitherto been computed,
yet Lexel ascertained that it described an ellipse about
the sun, whose major axis was only equal to three times the
length of the diameter of the terrestrial orbit, and consequently
that it must return to the sun at intervals of five years and a half.
This result was confirmed by numerous observations, as the comet
was visible through an arc of 170°; yet this comet had never
been observed before the year 1770, nor has it ever again been
seen till 1843, though very brilliant. The disturbing action of
the larger planets affords a solution of this anomaly, as Lexel
ascertained that in 1767 the comet must have passed Jupiter at
a distance less than the fifty-eighth part of its distance from the
sun, and that in 1779 it would be 500 times nearer Jupiter than
the sun; consequently the action of the sun on the comet would
not be the fiftieth part of what it would experience from Jupiter,
so that Jupiter became the primum mobile. Assuming the orbit
to be such as Lexel had determined in 1770, La Place found that
the action of Jupiter, previous to the year 1770, had so completely
changed the form of it, that the comet which had been invisible
to us before 1770 was then brought into view, and that the
action of the same planet, producing a contrary effect, has subsequently
to that year removed it from our sight, since it was
computed to be revolving in an orbit whose perihelion was
beyond the orbit of Ceres. However, the action of Jupiter during
the summer of 1840 must have been so great, from his proximity
to that singular body, that he seems to have brought it back to
its former path as he had done in 1767, for the elements of the
orbit of a comet which was discovered in November 1843, by M.
Faye, agree so nearly with those of the orbit of Lexel’s comet
362that the two bodies were supposed to be identical; by the subsequent
computation of M. le Verrier, it appears, however, that
they are not the same, that they were both brought to our system
by Jupiter’s attraction, and that they have been in it more than a
century, and have frequently come near the earth without having
been seen. From the smallness of the excentricity of Lexel’s
comet, the orbit resembles those of the planets, but this comet is
liable to greater perturbations than any other body in the system,
because it comes very near the orbit of Mars when in perihelion,
and very near that of Jupiter when in aphelion; besides, it passes
within a comparatively small distance of the orbits of the minor
planets; and as it will continue to cross the orbit of Jupiter at each
revolution till the two bodies meet, its periodic time, now about
seven years, will again be changed, but in the mean time it ought
to have returned to its perihelion in the year 1851. This comet
might have been seen from the earth in 1776, had its light not
been eclipsed by that of the sun. There is still so much doubt
with regard to Lexel’s comet that during the present year, 1858,
M. le Verrier has constructed a table of all the orbits in which
the comet may have moved after leaving Jupiter in 1770, which
will enable astronomers to recognise the comet even should the
elements of its orbit be much altered. He thinks it possible
that its path may have become hyperbolic, but that it is more
likely an augmentation of its periodic time may have taken place.
It is quite possible that comets frequenting our system may be
turned away, or others brought to the sun, by the attraction of
planets revolving beyond the orbit of Neptune, or by bodies still
farther removed from the solar influence.
Other comets, liable to less disturbance, return to the sun
at stated intervals. Halley computed the elements of the orbit
of a comet that appeared in the year 1682, which agreed so
nearly with those of the comets of 1607 and 1531, that he concluded
it to be the same body returning to the sun at intervals
of about seventy-five years. He consequently predicted its
reappearance in the year 1758, or in the beginning of 1759.
Science was not sufficiently advanced in the time of Halley to
enable him to determine the perturbations this comet might
experience; but Clairaut computed that, in consequence of the
attraction of Jupiter and Saturn, its periodic time would be so
much shorter than during its revolution between 1607 and 1682,
363that it would pass its perihelion on the 18th of April, 1759. The
comet did arrive at that point of its orbit on the 12th of March,
which was thirty-seven days before the time assigned. Clairaut
subsequently reduced the error to twenty-three days; and La
Place has since shown that it would only have been thirteen days
if the mass of Saturn had been as well known as it is now. It
appears, from this, that the path of the comet was not quite
known at that period; and, although many observations were
then made, they were far from attaining the accuracy of those of
the present day. Besides, since the year 1759, the orbit of the
comet has been altered by the attraction of Jupiter in one
direction, and that of Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune in the other;
yet, notwithstanding these sources of uncertainty, and our ignorance
of all the possible causes of derangement from unknown
bodies on the confines of our system, or in the regions beyond it,
the comet appeared exactly at the time, and not far from the
place assigned to it by astronomers; and its actual arrival at
its perihelion a little before noon on the 16th of November, 1835,
only differed from the computed time by a very few days, which
was probably owing to the attraction of Neptune.
The fulfilment of this astronomical prediction is truly wonderful,
if it be considered that the comet is seen only for a few
weeks during its passage through our system, and that it wanders
from the sun for seventy-five years to twice the distance of
Uranus. This enormous orbit is four times longer than it is
broad; its length is about 3420 millions of miles, or about
thirty-six times the mean distance of the earth from the sun.
At its perihelion the comet comes within nearly fifty-seven
millions of miles of the sun, and at its aphelion it is sixty times
more distant. On account of this extensive range it must experience
3600 times more light and heat when nearest to the sun
than in the most remote point of its orbit. In the one position
the sun will seem to be four times larger than he appears to us,
and at the other he will not be apparently larger than a star
(N. 228.)
On the first appearance of Halley’s comet, early in August
1835, it seemed to be merely a globular mass of dim vapour,
without a tail. A concentration of light, a little on one side of
the centre, increased as the comet approached the sun and earth,
and latterly looked so like the disc of a small planet, that it
364might have been mistaken for a solid nucleus. M. Struve, however,
saw a central occultation of a star of the ninth magnitude
by the comet, at Dorpat, on the 29th of September. The star
remained constantly visible, without any considerable diminution
of light; and, instead of being eclipsed, the nucleus of the comet
disappeared at the moment of conjunction from the brilliancy of
the star. The tail increased as the comet approached its perihelion,
and shortly before it was lost in the sun’s rays it was
between thirty and forty degrees in length.
According to the observations of M. Valz, the nebulosity
increased in magnitude as it approached the sun; but no
other comet on record has exhibited such sudden and unaccountable
changes of aspect. It was invisible for two months
when near its perihelion passage, and when it reappeared on
the 24th of January, 1836, its aspect was completely changed;
it had no tail, and to the naked eye was like a hazy star; but
with a powerful telescope it presented a small, round, planetary-looking
nucleus 2ʺ in diameter, surrounded by an extensive
coma, and in the centre it had a small, bright, solid part. The
nucleus, clear and well defined, like the disc of a planet, was
observed on one occasion to become obscure and enlarged in the
course of a few hours. But by far the most remarkable circumstance
was the sudden appearance of certain luminous brushes
or sectors, diverging from the centre of the nucleus through the
nebulosity. M. Struve describes the nucleus of the comet, in the
beginning of October, as elliptical, and like a burning coal, out of
which there issued, in a direction nearly opposite to the tail, a
divergent flame, varying in intensity, form, and direction, appearing
occasionally even double, and suggesting the idea of luminous
gas bursting from the nucleus. On one occasion M. Arago saw
three of these divergent flames on the side opposite the tail, rising
through the nebulosity, which they greatly exceeded in brilliancy:
after the comet had passed its perihelion, it acquired another of
these luminous fans, which was observed by Sir John Herschel
at the Cape of Good Hope. Hevelius describes an appearance
precisely similar, which he had witnessed in this comet at its
approach to the sun in the year 1682, and something of the kind
seems to have been noticed in the comet of 1744. Possibly the
second tail of the comet of 1724, which was directed towards the
sun, may have been of this nature.
365The influence of the ethereal medium on the motions of Halley’s
comet will be known after another revolution, and future astronomers
will learn, by the accuracy of its returns, whether it
has met with any unknown cause of disturbance in its distant
journey. Undiscovered planets, beyond the visible boundary of
our system, may change its path and the period of its revolution,
and thus may indirectly reveal to us their existence, and even
their physical nature and orbit. The secrets of the yet more
distant heavens may be disclosed to future generations by comets
which penetrate still farther into space, such as that of 1763,
which, if any faith may be placed in the computation, goes nearly
forty-three times farther from the sun than Halley’s does, and
shows that the sun’s attraction is powerful enough, at the enormous
distance of 15,500 millions of miles, to recall the comet
to its perihelion. The periods of some comets are said to be of
many thousand years, and even the average time of the revolution
of comets generally is about a thousand years; which proves
that the sun’s gravitating force extends very far. La Place
estimates that the solar attraction is felt throughout a sphere
whose radius is a hundred millions of times greater than the distance
of the earth from the sun.
Authentic records of Halley’s comet do not extend beyond the
year 1456, yet it may be traced, with some degree of probability,
even to a period preceding the Christian era. But as the evidence
only rests upon coincidences of its periodic time, which
may vary as much as eighteen months from the disturbing action
of the planets, its identity with comets of such remote times must
be regarded as extremely doubtful.
This is the first comet whose periodicity has been established.
It is also the first whose elements have been determined from
observations made in Europe; for, although the comets which
appeared in the years 240, 539, 565, and 837, are the most ancient
of those whose orbits have been traced, their elements were
computed from Chinese observations.
Besides Halley’s and Lexel’s comets, ten or twelve others are
now known to form part of the solar system; that is to say, they
return to the sun at stated periods. Six of them have periods of
less than eight years. That generally called Encke’s comet, or
the comet of the short period, was first seen by MM. Messier and
Mechain in 1786, again by Miss Herschel in 1805, and its returns,
366in the years 1805 and 1819, were observed by other astronomers,
under the impression that all four were different bodies. However,
Professor Encke not only proved their identity, but determined
the circumstances of the comet’s motion. Its reappearance in the
years 1825, 1828, and 1832, accorded with the orbit assigned by
M. Encke, who thus established the length of its period to be
1204 days, nearly. This comet is very small, of feeble light,
and invisible to the naked eye, except under very favourable
circumstances, and in particular positions. It has no tail, it
revolves in an ellipse of great excentricity inclined at an angle of
13° 22ʹ to the plane of the ecliptic, and is subject to considerable
perturbations from the attraction of the planets, which occasion
variations in its periodic time. Among the many perturbations
to which the planets are liable, their mean motions, and therefore
the major axes of their orbits, experience no change; while, on
the contrary, the mean motion of the moon is accelerated from
age to age—a circumstance at first attributed to the resistance of
an ethereal medium pervading space, but subsequently proved to
arise from the secular diminution of the excentricity of the terrestrial
orbit. Although the resistance of such a medium has
not hitherto been perceived in the motions of such dense bodies
as the planets and satellites, its effects on the revolutions of the
comets leave no doubt of its existence. From the numerous
observations that have been made on each return of the comet of
the short period, the elements have been computed with great
accuracy on the hypothesis of its moving in vacuo. Its perturbations
occasioned by the disturbing action of the planets
have been determined; and, after everything that could influence
its motion had been duly considered, M. Encke found that an
acceleration of about two days in each revolution has taken place
in its mean motion, precisely similar to that which would be
occasioned by the resistance of an ethereal medium. And, as it
cannot be attributed to a cause like that which produces the
acceleration of the moon, it must be concluded that the celestial
bodies do not perform their revolutions in an absolute void, and
that, although the medium be too rare to have a sensible effect
on the masses of the planets and satellites, it nevertheless has a
considerable influence on so rare a body as a comet. Contradictory
as it may seem that the motion of a body should be
accelerated by the resistance of an ethereal medium, the truth
367becomes evident if it be considered that both planets and comets
are retained in their orbits by two forces which exactly balance
one another; namely, the centrifugal force producing the velocity
in the tangent, and the attraction of the gravitating force directed
to the centre of the sun. If one of these forces be diminished by
any cause, the other will be proportionally increased. Now, the
necessary effect of a resisting medium is to diminish the tangential
velocity, so that the balance is destroyed, gravity preponderates,
the body descends towards the sun till equilibrium
is again restored between the two forces; and, as it then describes
a smaller orbit, it moves with increased velocity. Thus, the
resistance of an ethereal medium actually accelerates the motion
of a body; but, as the resisting force is confined to the plane of
the orbit, it has no influence whatever on the inclination of the
orbit, or on the place of the nodes. In computing its effect, M.
Encke assumed the increase to be inversely as the square of the
distance, and that its resistance acts as a tangential force proportional
to the squares of the comet’s actual velocity in each
point of its orbit. Another comet belonging to our system,
which returns to its perihelion after a period of
63⁄4
years, has
been accelerated in its motion by a whole day during one revolution,
which puts the existence of ether beyond a doubt, and confirms
the undulatory theory of light. Since this comet, which
revolves nearly between the orbits of the earth and Jupiter, is
only accelerated one day at each revolution, while Encke’s,
revolving nearly between the orbits of Mercury and Pallas, is
accelerated two, the ethereal medium must increase in density
towards the sun. The comet in question was discovered by M.
Biela at Josephstadt on the 27th of February, 1826, and ten
days afterwards it was seen by M. Gambart at Marseilles, who
computed its parabolic elements, and found that they agreed
with those of the comets which had appeared in the years 1789
and 1795, whence he concluded them to be the same body moving
in an ellipse, and accomplishing its revolution in 2460 days.
The perturbations of this comet were computed by M. Damoiseau,
who predicted that it would cross the plane of the ecliptic on the
29th of October, 1832, a little before midnight, at a point nearly
18,484 miles within the earth’s orbit; and as M. Olbers of Bremen,
in 1805, had determined the radius of the comet’s head to be
about 21,136 miles, it was evident that its nebulosity would
368envelop a portion of the earth’s orbit,—a circumstance which
caused some alarm in France, from the notion that, if any disturbing
cause had delayed the arrival of the comet for one month,
the earth must have passed through its head. M. Arago dispelled
these fears by his excellent treatise on comets, in the
Annuaire of 1832, where he proves that, as the earth would
never be nearer the comet than 18,000,000 British leagues, there
could be no danger of collision. The earth is in more danger
from these two small comets than from any other. Encke’s
crosses the terrestrial orbit sixty times in a century, and may
ultimately come into collision, but both are so extremely rare,
that little injury is to be apprehended.
The earth would fall to the sun in
641⁄2
days, if it were struck
by a comet with sufficient impetus to destroy its centrifugal
force. What the earth’s primitive velocity may have been it is
impossible to say. Therefore a comet may have given it a shock
without changing the axis of rotation, but only destroying part
of its tangential velocity, so as to diminish the size of the orbit—a
thing by no means impossible, though highly improbable. At
all events, there is no proof of this having occurred; and it is
manifest that the axis of the earth’s rotation has not been changed,
because, as the ether offers no sensible resistance to so dense a
body as the earth, the libration would to this day be evident in
the variation it must have occasioned in the terrestrial latitudes.
Supposing the nucleus of a comet to have a diameter only equal
to the fourth part of that of the earth, and that its perihelion is
nearer to the sun than we are ourselves, its orbit being otherwise
unknown, M. Arago has computed that the probability of the
earth receiving a shock from it is only one in 281 millions, and
that the chance of our coming in contact with its nebulosity is
about ten or twelve times greater. Only comets with retrograde
motions can come into direct collision with the earth, and if the
momentum were great the event might be fatal; but in general
the substance of comets is so rare, that it is likely they would
not do much harm if they were to impinge; and even then the
mischief would probably be local, and the equilibrium soon restored,
provided the nucleus were gaseous, or very small. It is,
however, more probable that the earth would only be deflected a
little from its course by the approach of a comet, without being
touched by it. The comets that have come nearest to the earth
369were that of the year 837, which remained four days within less
than 1,240,000 leagues from our orbit: that of 1770, which
approached within about six times the distance of the moon.
The celebrated comet of 1680 also came very near to us; and
the comet whose period is
63⁄4
years was ten times nearer the earth
in 1805 than in 1832, when it caused so much alarm.
Encke’s and Biela’s comets are at present far removed from
the influence of Jupiter, but they will not always remain so,
because, the aphelia and nodes of the orbits of these two
comets being the points which approach nearest to the orbit
of Jupiter at each meeting of the planet and comets, the
major axis of Encke’s comet will be increased and that of
Biela’s diminished, till in the course of time, when the proximity
has increased sufficiently, the orbits will be completely
changed, as that of Lexel’s was in 1770. Every twenty-third
year, or after seven revolutions of Encke’s comet, its greatest
proximity to Jupiter takes place, and at that time his attraction
increases the period of its revolution by nine days—a circumstance
which took place in the end of the years 1820 and 1843.
But from the position of the bodies there is a diminution of three
days in the six following revolutions, which reduces the increase
to six days in seven revolutions. Thus, before the year 1819,
the periodic time of Encke’s comet was 1204 days, and it was
1219 days in accomplishing the revolution that ended in 1845.
By this progressive increase the orbit of the comet will reach
that of Jupiter in seven or eight centuries, and then by the
very near approach of the two bodies it will be completely
changed.
At present the Earth and Mercury have the most powerful
influence on the motions of Encke’s and Biela’s comets; and
have had for so long a time that, according to the computation
of Mr. Airy, the present orbit of the latter was formed by the
attraction of the Earth, and that of Encke’s by the action of
Mercury. With regard to the latter comet, that event must
have taken place in February 1776. In 1786 Encke’s comet
had both a tail and a nucleus, now it has neither; a singular
instance of the possibility of their disappearance. It was in
perihelio in 1855.
In 1846 Biela’s comet was divided into two distinct bodies,
by what strange accident is altogether a mystery. The nuclei
370of the two comets were separated by about 150,000 miles, and
they travelled together with their tails parallel, and an arch of
light over their heads. Till that time Biela’s comet never had
been seen with a tail. The new head was dull at first, but increased
in size and brightness till it surpassed its companion in
both; besides, it had a bright flashing diamond-like point in its
centre—gradually it resumed its dull appearance, and its period
was computed to be eight days longer than that of the original
head. They had separated to a greater distance from one
another in 1853, but were still travelling together, one having
become smaller than the other.
A comet discovered by M. Brorsen of Kiel, on the 26th of
February, 1846, came, on the 20th of April following, nearly as
close to Jupiter as his fourth satellite, when Jupiter’s attraction
must have been ten times greater than that of the sun; so there
is every reason to believe that the comet’s orbit will be as much
altered as that of Lexel’s; and another discovered by Padre de
Vico at Rome, on the 22nd of August, will, in all probability, be
as much disturbed by the same cause. One of the comets found
by that astronomer has a period which varies, according to
different computations, from 55 to 99 years; it certainly has
an elliptical orbit. That discovered at Naples by Mr. Peters
revolves about the sun in 16 years; but Olbers’s comet of
1815 must go nearly the same distance into space with Halley’s,
since its period is 74 years. Two discovered by M. Brorsen have
periods, one of 500 and the other of 28 years; but of the latter
there is some uncertainty.
The comet which appeared in 1596 and 1845 has a period of
249 years; and should M. Argelander’s computation be accurate,
the orbit which has hitherto been assigned to the great comet of
1811 must be erroneous, since he has ascertained its period to
be 3066 years.
The great comet of 1264, which had a tail that extended over
100° of the celestial vault, was observed and recorded by the
Chinese, and was ascertained to be the same that had appeared
in 1556, and of whose motions observations were taken at
Vienna in the reign of the Emperor Charles V., but it was then
less brilliant. In consequence of the discovery of the original
observations of the comet of 1556, by Fabricius at Vienna, and
by Heller at Nuremburg, Mr. Hind was induced to compute its
371orbit for that year; but after much labour, aided by all the
improved methods of calculation, he found Heller’s observations
so confused, and even erroneous, that he could not determine the
curve described by the comet at that time with any precision,
and therefore could only predict that the epoch of its return
would be some time between 1848 and 1861. Before comets
reach the sun they are rarely conspicuous; but if after passing
their perihelion they come near the earth, then they have tails,
and become brilliant in consequence of the sun’s action upon the
matter of which they are formed. Now if the comet in question
should pass its perihelion between the months of March and
October, it possibly may be as remarkable as ever; but should
it come nearest to the sun in winter, such is the position of its
orbit with regard to the earth, that it may pass unnoticed—which
is very unlikely, as search is being made for it at almost
all the observatories in Europe and in the United States. Nearly
the whole of its orbit lies below the plane of the ecliptic, and
far from the paths of the larger planets, but it extends into space
more than twice the distance of Neptune, or nearly six thousand
millions of miles from the sun.
Comets in or near their perihelion move with prodigious velocity.
That of 1680 appears to have gone half round the sun in
ten hours and a half, moving at the rate of 880,000 miles an
hour. If its enormous centrifugal force had ceased when passing
its perihelion, it would have fallen to the sun in about three
minutes, as it was then less than 147,000 miles from his surface.
So near the sun, it would be exposed to a heat 27,500
times greater than that received by the earth; and as the sun’s
heat is supposed to be in proportion to the intensity of his light,
it is probable that a degree of heat so intense would be sufficient
to convert into vapour every terrestrial substance with which
we are acquainted. At the perihelion distance the sun’s diameter
would be seen from the comet under an angle of 73°, so that the
sun, viewed from the comet, would nearly cover the whole extent
of the heavens from the horizon to the zenith. As this comet is
presumed to have a period of 575 years, the major axis of its orbit
must be so great, that at the aphelion the sun’s diameter would only
subtend an angle of about fourteen seconds, which is not so great
by half as the diameter of Mars appears to us when in opposition.
The sun would consequently impart no heat, so that the comet
372would then be exposed to the temperature of the ethereal regions,
which is 239° below the zero point of Fahrenheit. A body of
such tenuity as the comet, moving with such velocity, must
have met with great resistance from the dense atmosphere of the
sun, while passing so near his surface at its perihelion. The
centrifugal force must consequently have been diminished, and
the sun’s attraction proportionally augmented, so that it must
have come nearer to the sun in 1680 than in its preceding revolution,
and would subsequently describe a smaller orbit. As
this diminution of its orbit will be repeated at each revolution,
the comet will infallibly end by falling on the surface of the sun,
unless its course be changed by the disturbing influence of some
large body in the unknown expanse of creation. Our ignorance
of the actual density of the sun’s atmosphere, of the density of
the comet, and of the period of its revolution, renders it impossible
to form any idea of the number of centuries which must
elapse before this event takes place.
The same cause may affect the motions of the planets, and
ultimately be the means of destroying the solar system. But, as
Sir John Herschel observes, they could hardly all revolve in the
same direction round the sun for so many ages without impressing
a corresponding motion on the ethereal medium, which may
preserve them from the accumulated effects of its resistance.
Should this material medium revolve about the sun like a vortex,
it will accelerate the revolutions of such comets as have direct
motions, and retard those that have retrograde motions.
The comet which appeared unexpectedly in the beginning of
the year 1843 was one of the most splendid that ever visited the
solar system. It was in the constellation of Antinous in the
end of January, at a distance of 115 millions of miles from the
earth, and it passed through its perihelion on the 27th of February,
when it was lost in the sun’s rays; but it began to be
visible about the 3rd of March, at which time it was near the
star Iota Cetæ, and its tail extended towards the Hare. Before the
passage at the perihelion it had no tail; but at that epoch the tail
suddenly darted out, and extended to a distance of 1826 millions of
miles in about an hour and a half—a most inexplicable speed of
development, which indicates some powerful repulsive force at the
moment of the greatest proximity to the sun, at which time the
tails are formed. The brightness of the comet and the length
373of its tail continued to increase till the latter stretched far beyond
the constellation of the Hare towards a point above Sirius.
Stars were distinctly seen through it, and when near perihelion
the comet was so bright that it was seen in clear sunshine, in
the United States, like a white cloud. The motion was retrograde,
and on leaving the solar system it retreated so rapidly at
once from the sun and earth that it was soon lost sight of for
want of light. On the 1st of April it was between the sun and the
earth, and only 40 millions of miles from the latter; and as its
tail was at least 60 millions of miles long, and 20 millions of
miles broad, we probably passed through it without being aware
of it. There is some discrepancy in the different computations
of the elements of the orbit, but in the greater number of cases
the perihelion distance was found to be less than the semidiameter
of the sun, so that the comet must have grazed his surface, if it
did not actually impinge obliquely on him.
The perihelion distance of this comet differs little from that
of the great comet of 1668, which came so near the sun. The
motion of both was retrograde, and a certain resemblance in the
two orbits makes it probable that they are the same body performing
a revolution in 175 years.
Though already so well acquainted with the motions of comets,
we know nothing of their physical constitution. A vast number,
especially of telescopic comets, are only like clouds or masses of
vapour, often without tails. The head commonly consists of
a concentrated mass of light, like a planet, surrounded by a
very transparent atmosphere, and the whole, viewed with a
telescope, is so diaphanous, that the smallest star may be seen
even through the densest part of the nucleus; in general their
solid parts, when they have any, are so minute, that they have no
sensible diameter, like that of the comet of 1811, which appeared
to Sir William Herschel like a luminous point in the middle of
the nebulous matter. The nuclei, which seem to be formed of
the denser strata of that nebulous matter in successive coatings,
are sometimes of great magnitude. Those comets which
came to the sun in the years 1799 and 1807 had nuclei whose
diameters measured 180 and 275 leagues respectively, and the
second comet of 1811 had a nucleus 1350 leagues in diameter.
It must, however, be stated that, as comets are generally at
prodigious distances from the earth, the solid parts of the nuclei
374appear like mere points of light, so minute that it is impossible
to measure them with any kind of accuracy, so that the best
astronomers often differ in the estimation of their size by one-half
of the whole diameter. The transit of a comet across the
sun would afford the best information with regard to the nature
of the nuclei. It was computed that such an event was to take
place in the year 1827; unfortunately the sun was hid by clouds
from the British astronomers, but it was examined at Viviers and
at Marseilles at the time the comet must have been projected on
its disc, but no spot or cloud was to be seen, so that it must have
had no solid part whatever. The nuclei of many comets which
seemed solid and brilliant to the naked eye have been resolved
into mere vapour by telescopes of high powers; in Halley’s comet
there was no solid part at all.
The nebulosity immediately round the nucleus is so diaphanous,
that it gives little light; but at a small distance the nebulous
matter becomes suddenly brilliant, so as to look like a bright
ring round the body. Sometimes there are two or three of these
luminous concentric rings separated by dark intervals, but they
are generally incomplete on the part next the tail.
These annular appearances are an optical effect, arising from a
succession of envelopes of the nebulous matter with intervals
between them, of which the first is sometimes in contact with
the nucleus and sometimes not. The thickness of these bright
diaphanous coatings in the comets of 1799 and 1807 was about
7000 and 10,000 leagues respectively; and in the first comet of
1811 the luminous ring was 8000 leagues thick, and the distance
between its interior surface and the centre of the head was 10,000
leagues. The latter comet was by much the most brilliant that
has been seen in modern times; it was first discovered in this
country by Mr. James Vietch of Inchbonny, and was observed in
all its changes by Sir William Herschel and M. Olbers. To the
naked eye, the head had the appearance of an ill-defined round
mass of light, which was resolved into several distinct parts when
viewed with a telescope. A very brilliant interior circular mass
of nebulous matter was surrounded by a black space having a
parabolic form, very distinct from the dark blue of the sky.
This dark space was of a very appreciable breadth. Exterior to
the black interval there was a luminous parabolic contour of
considerable thickness, which was prolonged on each side in two
375diverging branches, which formed the bifid tail of the comet. Sir
William Herschel found that the brilliant interior circular mass
lost the distinctness of its outline as he increased the magnifying
power of the telescope, and presented the appearance of a more
and more diffuse mass of greenish or blueish green light, whose
intensity decreased gradually, not from the centre, but from an
eccentric brilliant speck, supposed to be the truly solid part of the
comet. The luminous envelope was of a decided yellow, which
contrasted strongly with the greenish tint of the interior nebulous
mass. Stars were nearly veiled by the luminous envelope,
whilst, on the contrary, Sir William Herschel saw three extremely
small stars shining clearly in the black space, which was
singularly transparent. As the envelopes were formed in succession
as the comet approached the sun, Sir William Herschel conceived
them to be vapours raised by his heat at the surface of the
nucleus, and suspended round it like a vault or dome by the
elastic force of an extensive and highly transparent atmosphere.
In coming to the sun, the coatings began to form when the comet
was as distant as the orbit of Jupiter, and in its return they very
soon entirely vanished; but a new one was formed after it had
retreated as far as the orbit of Mars, which lasted for a few days.
Indeed, comets in general are subject to sudden and violent convulsions
in their interior, even when far from the sun, which
produce changes that are visible at enormous distances, and baffle
all attempts at explanation—probably arising from electricity, or
even causes with which we are unacquainted. The envelopes
surrounding the nucleus of the comet on the side next to the
sun diverge on the opposite side, where they are prolonged into
the form of a hollow cone, which is the tail. Two repulsive
forces seem to be concerned in producing this effect; one from
the comet and another from the sun, the latter being the most
powerful. The envelopes are nearer the centre of the comet on
the side next to the sun, where these forces are opposed to one
another; but on the other side the forces conspire to form the
tail, conveying the nebulous particles to enormous distances.
The lateral edges of the tail reflect more light than the central
part, because the line of vision passes through a greater depth of
nebulous matter, which produces the effect of two streams somewhat
like the aurora. Stars shine with undiminished lustre
through the central part of the tail, because their rays traverse it
376perpendicularly to its thickness; but, though distinctly seen
through its edges, their light is weakened by its oblique transmission.
The tail of the great comet of 1811 was of wonderful
tenuity; stars which would have been entirely concealed by the
slightest fog were seen through 64,000 leagues of nebulous matter
without the smallest refraction. Possibly some part of the
changes in the appearance of the tails arises from rotation.
Several comets have been observed to rotate about an axis passing
through the centre of the tail. That of 1825 performed its
rotation in
201⁄2
hours, and the rapid changes in the luminous
sectors which issued from the nucleus of Halley’s comet in all
probability were owing to rotatory motion.
The two streams of light which form the edges of the tail in
most cases unite at a greater or less distance from the nucleus,
and are generally situate in the plane of the orbit. The tails
follow comets in their descent towards the sun, but precede them
in their return, with a small degree of curvature; their apparent
extent and form vary according to the positions of the orbits with
regard to the ecliptic. In some cases the tail has been at right
angles to the line joining the sun and comet. The curvature is
in part owing to the resistance of the ether, and partly to the
velocity of the comet being greater than that of the particles at
the extremity of its tail, which lag behind. The tails are generally
of enormous lengths; the comet of 1811 had one no less
than a hundred millions of miles in length, and those which
appeared in the years 1618, 1680, and 1769, had tails which extended
respectively over 104, 90, and 97 degrees of space. Consequently,
when the heads of these comets were set, a portion of
the extremity of their tails was still in the zenith. Sometimes
the tail is divided into several branches, like the comet of 1744,
which had six, separated by dark intervals, each of them about
4° broad, and from 30° to 44° long. They were probably formed
by three hollow cones of the nebulous matter proceeding from the
different envelopes, and enclosing one another, with intervals
between; the lateral edges of these cones would give the appearance
of six streams of light. The tails do not attain their full
magnitude till the comet has left the sun. When comets first
appear, they resemble round films of vapour, with little or no
tail. As they approach the sun, they increase in brilliancy, and
their tail in length, till they are lost in his rays; and it is not
377till they emerge from the sun’s more vivid light that they assume
their full splendour. They then gradually decrease, their tails
diminish, and they disappear, nearly or altogether, before they
are beyond the sphere of telescopic vision. Many comets have
no tails, as, for example, Encke’s comet. Those which appeared
in the years 1585, 1763, and 1682, were also without tails,
though the latter is recorded to have been as bright as Jupiter.
The matter of the tail must be extremely buoyant to precede
a body moving with such velocity: indeed, the rapidity of
its ascent cannot be accounted for. It has been attributed to
that power in the sun which produces those vibrations of ether
which constitute light; but as this theory will not account for
the comet of 1824, which is said to have had two tails, one
directed towards the sun, and a very short one diametrically
opposite to it, our ignorance on this subject must be confessed.
In this case the repelling power of the comet seems to
have been greater than that of the sun. Whatever that unknown
power may be, there are instances in which its effects are enormous;
for, immediately after the great comet of 1680 had passed
its perihelion, its tail was 100,000,000 miles in length, and was
projected from the comet’s head in the short space of two days.
A body of such extreme tenuity as a comet is most likely incapable
of an attraction powerful enough to recall matter sent to
such an enormous distance; it is therefore, in all probability,
scattered in space or absorbed by the zodiacal light or nebula
that surrounds the sun, which may account for the rapid decrease
observed in the tails of comets every time they return to their
perihelia. Should the great comet of 1843 prove to be the same
with that of 1668, its tail must have diminished considerably.
It is remarkable that, although the tails of comets increase in
length as they approach their perihelia, there is reason to believe
that the real diameter of the head contracts on coming near the
sun, and expands rapidly on leaving him. Hevelius first observed
this phenomenon, which Encke’s comet has exhibited in a
very extraordinary degree. On the 28th of October, 1828, this
comet was about three times as far from the sun as it was on the
24th of December; yet at the first date its apparent diameter
was twenty-five times greater than at the second, the decrease
being progressive. M. Valz attributes the circumstance to a real
condensation of volume from the pressure of the ethereal medium,
378which increases most rapidly in density towards the surface of
the sun, and forms an extensive atmosphere around him. It
did not occur to M. Valz, however, that the ethereal fluid would
penetrate the nebulous matter instead of compressing it. Sir
John Herschel, on the contrary, conjectures that it may be owing
to the alternate conversion of evaporable materials in the upper
regions of the transparent atmosphere of comets into the states
of visible cloud and invisible gas by the effects of heat and cold;
or that some of the external nebulous envelopes may come into
view when the comet arrives at a darker part of the sky, which
were overpowered by the superior light of the sun while in his
vicinity. The first of these hypotheses he considers to be perfectly
confirmed by his observations on Halley’s comet, made at
the Cape of Good Hope, after its return from the sun. He
thinks that, in all probability, the whole comet, except the
densest part of its head, vanished, and was reduced to a transparent
and invisible state during its passage at its perihelion: for
when it first came into view, after leaving the sun, it had no tail,
and its aspect was completely changed. A parabolic envelope
soon began to appear, and increased so much and so rapidly that
its augmentation was visible to the eye. This increase continued
till it became so large and so faint, that at last it vanished
entirely, leaving only the nucleus and a tail, which it had again
acquired, but which also vanished; so that at last the nucleus
alone remained. Not only the tails, but the nebulous part of
comets, diminishes every time they return to their perihelia; after
frequent returns they ought to lose it altogether, and present the
appearance of a fixed nucleus: this ought to happen sooner to
comets of short periods. M. de la Place supposes that the comet
of 1682 must be approaching rapidly to that state. Should the
substances be altogether, or even to a great degree, evaporated,
the comet would disappear for ever. Possibly comets may have
vanished from our view sooner than they would otherwise have
done from this cause.
The comet discovered at Florence by Signore Donati, on the
2nd of June, 1858, was one of the most beautiful that has
been seen from our planet for many years, whether for the
brightness of the nucleus, or the length and graceful form of the
coma; when first discovered it was near the star λ in the constellation
of the Lion, being then at a distance of 288,000,000
379miles from the earth; during the month of August its nucleus
assumed an almost planetary aspect from the concentration of its
light; on the 27th of September the head appeared almost as
bright as Mercury, but smaller; when near its perihelion passage,
on September 30th, its diameter, as ascertained by Signore
Donati, was 3ʺ; during the early part of October it continued
to increase in brilliancy, the tail becoming more elongated, and
describing a beautiful arc in the heavens, occupying a space of
nearly 40°, or a length of 40,000,000 miles in the solar system.
On the evening of the 5th of October it was seen from most parts
of Britain, within 20ʹ of Arcturus, the brightest star in the
northern heavens, across which the densest part nearly of
the tail passed, and through which notwithstanding the star
shone with undiminished brilliancy. On the 30th of October,
when in perihelio, the comet was only 55,000,000 miles from
the sun; on the 10th it approached nearest to the earth, from
which it was then distant 51,000,000 miles; and on the 15th
of the same month near to Venus, being at that time less than
one-tenth the distance of the earth from the Sun; if the comet
had reached its perihelion a few days earlier, Venus might have
passed through its nucleus, the consequences of which to the
planet it would be very difficult to imagine. The motion of
Donati’s comet is what astronomer’s call retrograde, or from east
to west. It ceased to be visible in our northern latitudes in
the last week in October, having passed into the southern
heavens, where it will traverse the constellations of Sagittarius,
Telescopium, and Indus, approaching the large star of Toucan;
after which it will disappear until it has nearly completed its
revolution round the sun. The observed orbit of this remarkable
comet coincides more nearly with an ellipse than a parabola;
the longer diameter of the ellipse being 184 times that of
the earth’s orbit, or the immense distance of 35,100,000,000
miles—a space which, however great, is less than the thousandth
of the distance of the nearest fixed star. According to the calculations
of M. Loewy, and adopting an elliptic orbit, Donati’s
comet will not return to the same places in the heavens for
2495 years, being 500 less than the period of revolution of the
great comet of 1811.
Signore Donati observed that between the 25th and 30th September
two concentric, luminous, semicircular envelopes, with a
380dark space between them, were formed in the head. From the
extremities of these the cone of the tail extended, and a non-luminous
or dark space stretched for 20° from the nucleus into
the tail. On the 1st October the two envelopes were combined
into one. This comet, like Halley’s, has shown some singular
irregularities, supposed to arise from the action of the sun when
near its perihelion. At different periods of its apparition a
violent agitation was observed in its nucleus, with luminous jets,
spiral offshoots, &c., as in the great comets of 1680, 1744, 1811.
A ray of light was thrown out from one side of the nucleus
towards the sun, while a gas-like jet proceeded from the other
side, which appeared to form the origin of a second tail within the
great tail, and which was traced for half a degree by Mr. Hind
on the 19th September. He observed decided spiral convolutions
in the tail, which show that this comet has a rotatory
motion about an axis passing through the tail.
If comets shine by borrowed light, they ought, in certain positions,
to exhibit phases like the moon; but no such appearance
has been detected, except in one instance, when they are said to
have been observed by Hevelius and La Hire, in the year 1682.
In general, the light of comets is dull—that of the comet of 1811
was only equal to the tenth part of the light of the full moon—yet
some have been brilliant enough to be visible in full daylight,
especially the comet of 1744, which was seen without a telescope
at one o’clock in the afternoon, while the sun was shining.
Hence it may be inferred that, although some comets may be
altogether diaphanous, others seem to possess a solid mass resembling
a planet. But whether they shine by their own or by
reflected light has never been satisfactorily made out till now.
Even if the light of a comet were polarized, it would not afford a
decisive test, since a body is capable of reflecting light, though it
shines by its own. M. Arago, however, has, with great ingenuity,
discovered a method of ascertaining this point, independent
both of phases and polarization.
Since the rays of light diverge from a luminous point, they
will be scattered over a greater space as the distance increases, so
that the intensity of the light on a screen two feet from the
object is four times less than at the distance of one foot; three
feet from the object it is nine times less; and so on, decreasing
in intensity as the square of the distance increases. As a self-luminous
381surface consists of an infinite number of luminous
points, it is clear that, the greater the extent of surface, the more
intense will be the light; whence it may be concluded that the
illuminating power of such a surface is proportional to its extent,
and decreases inversely as the square of the distance. Notwithstanding
this, a self-luminous surface, plane or curved, viewed
through a hole in a plate of metal, is of the same brilliancy at all
possible distances as long as it subtends a sensible angle, because,
as the distance increases, a greater portion comes into view; and,
as the augmentation of surface is as the square of the diameter of
the part seen through the whole, it increases as the square of the
distance. Hence, though the number of rays from any one point
of the surface which pass through the hole decreases inversely as
the square of the distance, yet, as the extent of surface which
comes into view increases also in that ratio, the brightness of the
object is the same to the eye as long as it has a sensible diameter.
For example—Uranus is about nineteen times farther from the
sun than we are, so that the sun, seen from that planet, must
appear like a star with a diameter of a hundred seconds, and
must have the same brilliancy to the inhabitants that he would
have to us if viewed through a small circular hole having a
diameter of a hundred seconds. For it is obvious that light
comes from every point of the sun’s surface to Uranus, whereas a
very small portion of his disc is visible through the hole; so
that extent of surface exactly compensates distance. Since, then,
the visibility of a self-luminous object does not depend upon the
angle it subtends as long as it is of sensible magnitude, if a comet
shines by its own light, it should retain its brilliancy as long as
its diameter is of a sensible magnitude; and, even after it has
lost an apparent diameter, it ought to be visible, like the fixed
stars, and should only vanish in consequence of extreme remoteness.
That, however, is far from being the case—comets gradually
become dim as their distance increases, and vanish merely
from loss of light, while they still retain a sensible diameter,
which is proved by observations made the evening before they
disappear. It may therefore be concluded that comets shine by
reflecting the sun’s light. The most brilliant comets have
hitherto ceased to be visible when about five times as far from
the sun as we are. Most of the comets that have been visible
from the earth have their perihelia within the orbit of Mars,
382because they are invisible when as distant as the orbit of Saturn:
on that account there is not one on record whose perihelion is
situate beyond the orbit of Jupiter. Indeed, the comet of 1756,
after its last appearance, remained five whole years within the
ellipse described by Saturn without being once seen. More than
a hundred and forty comets have appeared within the earth’s
orbit during the last century that have not again been seen. If
a thousand years be allowed as the average period of each, it may
be computed, by the theory of probabilities, that the whole
number which range within the earth’s orbit must be 1400; but,
Uranus being about nineteen times more distant, there may be
no less than 11,200,000 comets that come within the orbit of
Uranus. M. Arago makes a different estimate; he considers that,
as thirty comets are known to have their perihelion distance
within the orbit of Mercury, if it be assumed that comets are
uniformly distributed in space, the number having their perihelion
within the orbit of Uranus must be to thirty as the cube of
the radius of the orbit of Uranus to the cube of the radius of the
orbit of Mercury, which makes the number of comets amount to
3,529,470. But that number may be doubled, if it be considered
that, in consequence of daylight, fogs, and great southern declination,
one comet out of two must be hid from us. According
to M. Arago, more than seven millions of comets come within
the orbit of Uranus.
The different degrees of velocity with which the planets and
comets were originally propelled in space is the sole cause of the
diversity in the form of their orbits, which depends only upon
the mutual relation between the projectile force and the sun’s
attraction.
When the two forces are exactly equal to one another, circular
motion is produced; when the ratio of the projectile to the
central force is exactly that of 1 to the square root of 2, the
motion is parabolic; any ratio between these two will cause a
body to move in an ellipse, and any ratio greater than that of 1
to the square root of 2 will produce hyperbolic motion (N. 229).
The celestial bodies might move in any one of these four curves
by the law of gravitation: but, as one particular velocity is
necessary to produce either circular or parabolic motion, such
motions can hardly be supposed to exist in the solar system,
where the bodies are liable to such mutual disturbances as would
383infallibly change the ratio of the forces, and cause them to move
in ellipses in the first case, and hyperbolas in the other. On the
contrary, since every ratio between equality and that of 1 to the
square root of 2 will produce elliptical motion, it is found in the
solar system in all its varieties, from that which is nearly circular
to such as borders on the parabolic from excessive ellipticity. On
this depends the stability of the system; the mutual disturbances
only cause the orbits to become more or less excentric without
changing their nature.
For the same reason the bodies of the solar system might have
moved in an infinite variety of hyperbolas, since any ratio of the
forces, greater than that which causes parabolic motion, will
make a body move in one of these curves. Hyperbolic motion is
however very rare; only two comets appear to move in orbits of
that nature, those of 1771 and 1824; probably all such comets
have already come to their perihelia, and consequently will never
return.
The ratio of the forces which fixed the nature of the celestial
orbits is thus easily explained; but the circumstances which
determined these ratios, which caused some bodies to move nearly
in circles and others to wander towards the limits of the solar
attraction, and which made all the heavenly bodies to rotate and
revolve in the same direction, must have had their origin in the
primeval state of things; but as it pleases the Supreme Intelligence
to employ gravitation alone in the maintenance of this fair
system, it may be presumed to have presided at its creation.</div></body></text></TEI>