<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="7">
44
SECTION VI.

Form of the Earth and Planets—Figure of a Homogeneous Spheroid in
Rotation—Figure of a Spheroid of variable Density—Figure of the
Earth, supposing it to be an Ellipsoid of Revolution—Mensuration of a
Degree of the Meridian—Compression and Size of the Earth from
Degrees of Meridian—Figure of Earth from the Pendulum.
The theoretical investigation of the figure of the earth and planets
is so complicated, that neither the geometry of Newton, nor the
refined analysis of La Place, has attained more than an approximation.
The solution of that difficult problem has been accomplished
by our distinguished countryman Mr. Ivory. The investigation
has been conducted by successive steps, beginning with a simple
case, and then proceeding to the more difficult. But, in all, the
forces which occasion the revolutions of the earth and planets are
omitted, because, by acting equally upon all the particles, they
do not disturb their mutual relations. A fluid mass of uniform
density, whose particles mutually gravitate to each other, will
assume the form of a sphere when at rest. But, if the sphere
begins to revolve, every particle will describe a circle (N. 117),
having its centre in the axis of revolution. The planes of all
these circles will be parallel to one another and perpendicular to
the axis, and the particles will have a tendency to fly from that
axis in consequence of the centrifugal force arising from the
velocity of rotation. The force of gravity is everywhere perpendicular
to the surface (N. 118), and tends to the interior of the
fluid mass; whereas the centrifugal force acts perpendicularly to
the axis of rotation, and is directed to the exterior. And, as its
intensity diminishes with the distance from the axis of rotation,
it decreases from the equator to the poles, where it ceases. Now
it is clear that these two forces are in direct opposition to each
other in the equator alone, and that gravity is there diminished
by the whole effect of the centrifugal force, whereas, in every
other part of the fluid, the centrifugal force is resolved into two
parts, one of which, being perpendicular to the surface, diminishes
45the force of gravity; but the other, being at a tangent to the surface,
urges the particles towards the equator, where they accumulate
till their numbers compensate the diminution of gravity,
which makes the mass bulge at the equator, and become flattened
at the poles. It appears, then, that the influence of the centrifugal
force is most powerful at the equator, not only because it is
actually greater there than elsewhere, but because its whole effect
is employed in diminishing gravity, whereas, in every other point
of the fluid mass, it is only a part that is so employed. For both
these reasons, it gradually decreases towards the poles, where it
ceases. On the contrary, gravity is least at the equator, because
the particles are farther from the centre of the mass, and increases
towards the poles, where it is greatest. It is evident, therefore,
that, as the centrifugal force is much less than the force of
gravity—gravitation, which is the difference between the two, is
least at the equator, and continually increases towards the poles,
where it is a maximum. On these principles Sir Isaac Newton
proved that a homogeneous fluid (N. 119) mass in rotation
assumes the form of an ellipsoid of revolution (N. 120), whose
compression is
1⁄230.
Such, however, cannot be the form of the
earth, because the strata increase in density towards the centre.
The lunar inequalities also prove the earth to be so constructed;
it was requisite, therefore, to consider the fluid mass to be of
variable density. Including this condition, it has been found
that the mass, when in rotation, would still assume the form of
an ellipsoid of revolution (N. 120); that the particles of equal
density would arrange themselves in concentric elliptical strata
(N. 121), the most dense being in the centre; but that the compression
or flattening would be less than in the case of the
homogeneous fluid. The compression is still less when the mass
is considered to be, as it actually is, a solid nucleus, decreasing
regularly in density from the centre to the surface, and partially
covered by the ocean, because the solid parts, by their cohesion,
nearly destroy that part of the centrifugal force which gives the
particles a tendency to accumulate at the equator, though not
altogether; otherwise the sea, by the superior mobility of its
particles, would flow towards the equator and leave the poles
dry. Besides, it is well known that the continents at the
equator are more elevated than they are in higher latitudes. It
is also necessary for the equilibrium of the ocean that its density
46should be less than the mean density of the earth, otherwise the
continents would be perpetually liable to inundations from storms
and other causes. On the whole, it appears from theory, that a
horizontal line passing round the earth through both poles must
be nearly an ellipse, having its major axis in the plane of the
equator, and its minor axis coincident with the axis of the earth’s
rotation (N. 122). It is easy to show, in a spheroid whose strata
are elliptical, that the increase in the length of the radii (N. 123),
the decrease of gravitation, and the increase in the length of the
arcs of the meridian, corresponding to angles of one degree, from
the poles to the equator, are all proportional to the square of the
cosine of the latitude (N. 124). These quantities are so connected
with the ellipticity of the spheroid, that the total increase
in the length of the radii is equal to the compression or flattening,
and the total diminution in the length of the arcs is equal to the
compression, multiplied by three times the length of an arc of
one degree at the equator. Hence, by measuring the meridian
curvature of the earth, the compression, and consequently its
figure, become known. This, indeed, is assuming the earth to
be an ellipsoid of revolution; but the actual measurement of the
globe will show how far it corresponds with that solid in figure
and constitution.
The courses of the great rivers, which are in general navigable
to a considerable extent, prove that the curvature of the land
differs but little from that of the ocean; and, as the heights of
the mountains and continents are inconsiderable when compared
with the magnitude of the earth, its figure is understood to be
determined by a surface at every point perpendicular to the
direction of gravitation, or of the plumb-line, and is the same
which the sea would have if it were continued all round the
earth beneath the continents. Such is the figure that has been
measured in the following manner:—
A terrestrial meridian is a line passing through both poles, all
the points of which have their noon contemporaneously. Were
the lengths and curvatures of different meridians known, the
figure of the earth might be determined. But the length of one
degree is sufficient to give the figure of the earth, if it be measured
on different meridians, and in a variety of latitudes. For,
if the earth were a sphere, all degrees would be of the same
length; but, if not, the lengths of the degrees would be greater,
47exactly in proportion as the curvature is less. A comparison of
the length of a degree in different parts of the earth’s surface will
therefore determine its size and form.
An arc of the meridian may be measured by determining
the latitude of its extreme points by astronomical observations
(N. 125), and then measuring the distance between them in
feet or fathoms. The distance thus determined on the surface
of the earth, divided by the degrees and parts of a degree
contained in the difference of the latitudes, will give the exact
length of one degree, the difference of the latitudes being
the angle contained between the verticals at the extremities
of the arc. This would be easily accomplished were the distance
unobstructed and on a level with the sea. But, on account
of the innumerable obstacles on the surface of the earth, it is
necessary to connect the extreme points of the arc by a series
of triangles (N. 126), the sides and angles of which are either
measured or computed, so that the length of the arc is ascertained
with much laborious calculation. In consequence of the irregularities
of the surface each triangle is in a different plane.
They must therefore be reduced by computation to what they
would have been had they been measured on the surface of the
sea. And, as the earth may in this case be esteemed spherical,
they require a correction to reduce them to spherical triangles.
The officers who conducted the trigonometrical survey, in measuring
500 feet of a base in Ireland twice over, found that the
difference in the two measurements did not amount to the 800th
part of an inch; and in the General Survey of Great Britain, five
bases were measured from 5 to 7 miles long, and some of them
400 miles apart, yet, when connected by series of triangles, the
measured and computed lengths did not differ by more than
3 inches, an unparalleled degree of accuracy; but such is the
accuracy with which these operations are conducted.
Arcs of the meridian have been measured in a variety of latitudes
in both hemispheres, as well as arcs perpendicular to the
meridian. From these measurements it appears that the length
of the degrees increases from the equator to the poles, nearly in
proportion to the square of the sine of the latitude (N. 127).
Consequently, the convexity of the earth diminishes from the
equator to the poles.
Were the earth an ellipsoid of revolution, the meridians would
be ellipses whose lesser axes would coincide with the axis of
48rotation, and all the degrees measured between the pole and the
equator would give the same compression when combined two
and two. That, however, is far from being the case. Scarcely
any of the measurements give exactly the same results, chiefly
on account of local attractions, which cause the plumb-line to
deviate from the vertical. The vicinity of mountains produces
that effect. One of the most remarkable anomalies of this kind
has been observed in certain localities of northern Italy, where
the action of some dense subterraneous matter causes the plumb-line
to deviate seven or eight times more than it did from
the attraction of Chimborazo, in the observations of Bouguer,
while measuring a degree of the meridian at the equator. In
consequence of this local attraction, the degrees of the meridian
in that part of Italy seem to increase towards the equator through
a small space, instead of decreasing, as if the earth was drawn
out at the poles, instead of being flattened.
Many other discrepancies occur, but from the mean of the five
principal measurements of arcs in Peru, India, France, England,
and Lapland, Mr. Ivory has deduced that the figure which most
nearly follows this law is an ellipsoid of revolution whose equatorial
radius is 3962·824 miles, and the polar radius 3949·585
miles. The difference, or 13·239 miles, divided by the equatorial
radius, is
1⁄299
nearly[3] (N. 128). This fraction is called the compression
of the earth, and does not differ much from that given
by the lunar inequalities. Since the preceding quantities were
determined, arcs of the meridian have been measured in various
parts of the globe, of which the most extensive are the Russian
arc of 25° 20ʹ between the Glacial Sea and the Danube, conducted
under the superintendence of M. Struve, and the Indian arc extended
to 21° 21ʹ, by Colonel Everest. The compression deduced
by Bessel from the sum of ten arcs is
2983⁄4,
the equatorial radius
3962·802, and the polar 3949·554 miles, whilst Mr. Airy arrives
at an almost identical result (3962·824, 3949·585, and
29883⁄100)
from a consideration of all the arcs, measured up to 1831, including
the great Indian and Russian ones. If we assume the
earth to be a sphere, the length of a degree of the meridian is
6914⁄100
English miles. Therefore 360 degrees, or the whole equatorial
49circumference of the globe, is 24,899 English miles.
Eratosthenes, who died 194 years before the Christian era, was
the first to give an approximate value of the earth’s circumference,
by the measurement of an arc between Alexandria and
Syene.
There is another method of finding the figure of the earth,
totally different from the preceding, solely depending upon the
increase of gravitation from the equator to the poles. The force
of gravitation at any place is measured by the descent of a heavy
body during the first second of its fall. And the intensity of the
centrifugal force is measured by the deflection of any point from
the tangent in a second. For, since the centrifugal force balances
the attraction of the earth, it is an exact measure of the gravitating
force. Were the attraction to cease, a body on the surface
of the earth would fly off in the tangent by the centrifugal force,
instead of bending round in the circle of rotation. Therefore,
the deflection of the circle from the tangent in a second measures
the intensity of the earth’s attraction, and is equal to the versed
sine of the arc described during that time, a quantity easily
determined from the known velocity of the earth’s rotation.
Whence it has been found that at the equator the centrifugal
force is equal to the 289th part of gravity. Now, it is proved
by analysis that, whatever the constitution of the earth and
planets may be, if the intensity of gravitation at the equator be
taken equal to unity, the sum of the compression of the ellipsoid,
and the whole increase of gravitation from the equator to the
pole, is equal to five halves of the ratio of the centrifugal force to
gravitation at the equator. This quantity with regard to the
earth is
5⁄2
of
1⁄289
or
1⁄115·2.
Consequently, the compression of the
earth is equal to
1⁄115·2
diminished by the whole increase of gravitation.
So that its form will be known, if the whole increase of
gravitation from the equator to the pole can be determined by
experiment. This has been accomplished by a method founded
upon the following considerations:—If the earth were a homogeneous
sphere without rotation, its attraction on bodies at its surface
would be everywhere the same. If it be elliptical and of variable
density, the force of gravity, theoretically, ought to increase
from the equator to the pole, as unity plus a constant quantity
multiplied into the square of the sine of the latitude (N. 127).
But for a spheroid in rotation the centrifugal force varies, by the
laws of mechanics, as the square of the sine of the latitude, from
50the equator, where it is greatest, to the pole, where it vanishes.
And, as it tends to make bodies fly off the surface, it diminishes
the force of gravity by a small quantity. Hence, by gravitation,
which is the difference of these two forces, the fall of bodies
ought to be accelerated from the equator to the poles proportionably
to the square of the sine of the latitude; and the weight of
the same body ought to increase in that ratio. This is directly
proved by the oscillations of the pendulum (N. 129), which, in
fact, is a falling body; for, if the fall of bodies be accelerated,
the oscillations will be more rapid: in order, therefore, that they
may always be performed in the same time, the length of the
pendulum must be altered. By numerous and careful experiments
it is proved that a pendulum, which oscillates 86,400
times in a mean day at the equator, will do the same at every
point of the earth’s surface, if its length be increased progressively
to the pole, as the square of the sine of the latitude.
From the mean of these it appears that the whole decrease of
gravitation from the poles to the equator is 0·0051449, which,
subtracted from
1⁄115·2,
shows that the compression of the terrestrial
spheroid is about
1⁄285·26.
This value has been deduced by
the late Mr. Baily, president of the Astronomical Society, who
devoted much attention to this subject; at the same time, it may
be observed that no two sets of pendulum experiments give the
same result, probably from local attractions. The compression
obtained by this method does not differ much from that given by
the lunar inequalities, nor from the arcs in the direction of the
meridian, and those perpendicular to it. The near coincidence
of these three values, deduced by methods so entirely independent
of each other, shows that the mutual tendencies of the centres of
the celestial bodies to one another, and the attraction of the earth
for bodies at its surface, result from the reciprocal attraction of
all their particles. Another proof may be added. The nutation
of the earth’s axis and the precession of the equinoxes (N. 146) are
occasioned by the action of the sun and moon on the protuberant
matter at the earth’s equator. And, although these inequalities
do not give the absolute value of the terrestrial compression, they
show that the fraction expressing it is comprised between the
limits
1⁄279
and
1⁄573.
It might be expected that the same compression should result
from each, if the different methods of observation could be made
without error. This, however, is not the case; for after allowance
51has been made for every cause of error, such discrepancies
are found, both in the degrees of the meridian and in the length
of the pendulum, as show that the figure of the earth is very
complicated. But they are so small, when compared with the
general results, that they may be disregarded. The compression
deduced from the mean of the whole appears not to differ much
from
1⁄300;
that given by the lunar theory has the advantage of
being independent of the irregularities of the earth’s surface and
of local attractions. The regularity with which the observed
variation in the length of the pendulum follows the law of the
square of the sine of the latitude proves the strata to be elliptical,
and symmetrically disposed round the centre of gravity of the
earth, which affords a strong presumption in favour of its
original fluidity. It is remarkable how little influence the sea
has on the variation of the lengths of the arcs of the meridian,
or on gravitation; neither does it much affect the lunar inequalities,
from its density being only about a fifth of the mean
density of the earth. For, if the earth were to become fluid,
after being stripped of the ocean, it would assume the form of an
ellipsoid of revolution whose compression is
1⁄304·8,
which differs
very little from that determined by observation, and proves, not
only that the density of the ocean is inconsiderable, but that its
mean depth is very small. There are profound cavities in the
bottom of the sea, but its mean depth probably does not much
exceed the mean height of the continents and islands above its
level. On this account, immense tracts of land may be deserted
or overwhelmed by the ocean, as appears really to have been the
case, without any great change in the form of the terrestrial
spheroid. The variation in the length of the pendulum was first
remarked by Richter in 1672, while observing transits of the
fixed stars across the meridian at Cayenne, about five degrees
north of the equator. He found that his clock lost at the rate of
2m 28s daily, which induced him to determine the length of a
pendulum beating seconds in that latitude; and, repeating the
experiments on his return to Europe, he found the seconds’ pendulum
at Paris to be more than the twelfth of an inch longer than
that at Cayenne. The form and size of the earth being determined,
a standard of measure is furnished with which the dimensions
of the solar system may be compared.</div></body></text></TEI>