<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="14">
91
SECTION XIII.

Tides—Forces that produce them—Origin and Course of Tidal Wave—Its
Speed—Three kinds of Oscillations in the Ocean—The Semidiurnal
Tides—Equinoctial Tides—Effects of the Declination of the Sun and
Moon—Theory insufficient without Observation—Direction of the
Tidal Wave—Height of Tides—Mass of Moon obtained from her
Action on the Tides—Interference of Undulations—Impossibility of a
Universal Inundation—Currents.
One of the most immediate and remarkable effects of a gravitating
force external to the earth is the alternate rise and fall
of the surface of the sea twice in the course of a lunar day, or
24h 50m 28s of mean solar time. As it depends upon the action
of the sun and moon, it is classed among astronomical problems,
of which it is by far the most difficult and its explanation the
least satisfactory. The form of the surface of the ocean in equilibrio,
when revolving with the earth round its axis, is an ellipsoid
flattened at the poles; but the action of the sun and moon, especially
of the moon, disturbs the equilibrium of the ocean. If
the moon attracted the centre of gravity of the earth and all its
particles with equal and parallel forces, the whole system of the
earth and the waters that cover it would yield to these forces
with a common motion, and the equilibrium of the seas would
remain undisturbed. The difference of the forces and the inequality
of their directions alone disturb the equilibrium.
The particles of water under the moon are more attracted than
the centre of gravity of the earth, in the inverse ratio of the
square of the distance. Hence they have a tendency to leave
the earth, but are retained by their gravitation, which is diminished
by this tendency. On the contrary, the moon attracts
the centre of the earth more powerfully than she attracts the
particles of water in the hemisphere opposite to her; so that the
earth has a tendency to leave the waters, but is retained by
gravitation, which is again diminished by this tendency. Thus
the waters immediately under the moon are drawn from the
earth, at the same time that the earth is drawn from those
92which are diametrically opposite to her, in both instances producing
an elevation of the ocean of nearly the same height above
the surface of equilibrium; for the diminution of the gravitation
of the particles in each position is almost the same, on account
of the distance of the moon being great in comparison of the
radius of the earth. Were the earth entirely covered by the sea,
the waters thus attracted by the moon would assume the form of
an oblong spheroid whose greater axis would point towards the
moon; since the columns of water under the moon, and in the
direction diametrically opposite to her, are rendered lighter in
consequence of the diminution of their gravitation; and, in
order to preserve the equilibrium, the axes 90° distant would be
shortened. The elevation, on account of the smaller space to
which it is confined, is twice as great as the depression, because
the contents of the spheroid always remain the same. If the
waters were capable of assuming the form of equilibrium instantaneously,
that is, the form of the spheroid, its summit would
always point to the moon notwithstanding the earth’s rotation.
But, on account of their resistance, the rapid motion produced
in them by rotation prevents them from assuming at every
instant the form which the equilibrium of the forces acting upon
them requires. Hence, on account of the inertia of the waters,
if the tides be considered relatively to the whole earth and open
seas, there is a meridian about 30° eastward of the moon, where
it is always high water both in the hemisphere where the moon
is and in that which is opposite. On the west side of this circle
the tide is flowing, on the east it is ebbing, and on every part of
the meridian at 90° distant it is low water. This great wave,
which follows all the motions of the moon as far as the rotation
of the earth will permit, is modified by the action of the sun, the
effects of whose attraction are in every respect like those produced
by the moon, though greatly less in degree. Consequently
a similar wave, but much smaller, raised by the sun, tends to
follow his motions, which at times combines with the lunar
wave, and at others opposes it, according to the relative positions
of the two luminaries; but as the lunar wave is only modified a
little by the solar, the tides must necessarily happen twice in a
day, since the rotation of the earth brings the same point twice
under the meridian of the moon in that time, once under the
superior and once under the inferior meridian.
93The periodic motions of the waters of the ocean, on the hypothesis
of an ellipsoid of revolution, entirely covered by the sea,
are, however, very far from according with observation. This
arises from the great irregularities in the surface of the earth,
which is but partially covered by the sea, from the variety in
the depths of the ocean, the manner in which it is spread out on
the earth, the position and inclination of the shores, the currents,
and the resistance which the waters meet with: causes impossible
to estimate generally, but which modify the oscillations of
the great mass of the ocean. However, amidst all these irregularities,
the ebb and flow of the sea maintain a ratio to the forces
producing them sufficient to indicate their nature, and to verify
the law of the attraction of the sun and moon on the sea. La
Place observes, that the investigation of such relations between
cause and effect is no less useful in natural philosophy than the
direct solution of problems, either to prove the existence of the
causes or to trace the laws of their effects. Like the theory of
probabilities, it is a happy supplement to the ignorance and
weakness of the human mind.
Since the disturbing action of the sun and moon can only
become sensible in a very great extent of deep water, the Antarctic
Ocean is the origin and birthplace of our tides. A succession
of tidal waves from that source follow one another in a
north-westerly direction down the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans,
modified as they proceed by the depth of the water and the
form of the coasts. For when the sun and moon are in the same
meridian, and pass over the mass of waters lying east from Van
Diemen’s Land, New Zealand, and the South Pole, the resulting
force of their combined attraction, penetrating to the abyss of the
deep and boundless circuit of the Southern Ocean, raises a vast
wave or ridge of water, which tends to follow the luminaries to
the north and west, and continues to flow in that direction long
after the bodies cease to act upon it; but it is so retarded by the
rotation of the earth and by the inertia of the water, that it does
not arrive at the different parts of the coasts till after the
moon’s southing (N. 156). When this tidal wave leaves the
Antarctic Ocean and enters the Pacific, it rushes along the
western coast of America to its farthest end, but it is so much
obstructed by the number of islands in the middle of that ocean
that it is hardly perceptible among them; while on the east it
94enters the Indian Ocean, strikes with violence on the coasts of
Hindostan and the shores at the mouths of the Ganges, and
causes the terrific bore in the Hoogly. The part of this tidal
wave that enters the Atlantic passes impetuously along the
coasts of Africa and America, arriving later and later at each
place. It is modified, however, by a tide raised in the Atlantic,
which is deep and free from islands; and this combined tidal
wave, still coming northward, pours its surge into the Gulf of
Fundy to the height of fifty feet; then being deflected by the
coast of America at right angles, it rushes eastward, bringing
high water to the western coasts of Ireland and England. It
then goes round Scotland, brings high water to Aberdeen and
the opposite coasts of Norway and Denmark, and, continuing its
course to the south, arrives at the mouth of the Thames and
fills the channels of that river on the morning of the third day
after leaving the Antarctic Ocean.
Thus the tides in our ports are owing to an impulse from the
waters of the Antarctic seas raised by the action of the sun and
moon. No doubt a similar action raised that tide in the North
Polar Ocean which Dr. Kane saw rolling on the northern coast
of Greenland in 82° N. latitude, but which, in the present state
of the globe, is imprisoned by bars of ice and ice-bound lands.
The tidal wave extends to the bottom of the ocean, and moves
uniformly and with great speed in very deep water, variably and
slow in shallow water; the time of propagation depends upon
the depth of the sea, as well as on the nature and form of the
coasts. It varies inversely as the square of the depth—a law
which theoretically affords the means of ascertaining the proportionate
depth of the sea in different parts. It is one of the great
constants of nature, and is to fluids what the pendulum is to
solids—a connecting link between time and force.
For example: the tidal wave moves across the Southern
Ocean with the velocity of 1000 miles an hour, and in the
Atlantic it is scarcely less on account of the deep trough which
runs through the centre of that ocean; but the sea is so shallow
on the British coast that it takes more time to come from Aberdeen
to London than to travel over an arc of 120°, between 60°
S. lat. and 60° N. lat.
In deep water the tidal wave is merely a rise and fall of the
surface; the water does not advance, though the wave does. Indeed,
95if so heavy a body as water were to move at the rate of
1000 miles an hour, it would cause universal destruction, since
in the most violent hurricanes the velocity of the wind is little
more than 100 miles an hour. Besides, it is evident that no
ship could either sail or steam against it. When the water is
shallow, however, there is a motion of translation in the water
along with the tide.
In the deep ocean the undulating motion consists of two distinct
things—an advancing form and a molecular movement.
The motion of each particle of water is in an ellipse lying wholly
in the vertical plane; so that, after the momentary displacement
during the passage of the wave, they return to their places
again. The resistance of the sea-bed is insensible in deep water;
but when the tidal wave, which extends to the very bottom of
the ocean, comes into shallow water with diminished velocity, the
particles of water moving in vertical ellipses strike the bottom,
and by reaction the wave rises higher; and that being continually
repeated, as the form moves on the wave rises higher and higher,
bends more and more forward, till at last it loses its equilibrium,
and then both form and water roll to the shore, and the elliptical
trajectories of the particles, which in deep water were vertical,
incline more and more, till at length they become horizontal.
The distance from the shore at which the water begins to be
translated depends upon the depth, the nature of the coast, and
the form of the shore. Mr. Scott Russell has demonstrated that
in shallow water the velocity of the wave is equal to that which
a heavy body falling freely by its gravity would acquire in
descending through half the depth of the fluid.
It is proved by daily experience, as well as by strict mathematical
reasoning, that, if a number of waves or oscillations be
excited in a fluid by different forces, each pursues its course and
has its effect independently of the rest. Now, in the tides there
are three kinds of oscillations, depending on different causes, and
producing their effects independently of each other, which may
therefore be estimated separately. The oscillations of the first
kind, which are very small, are independent of the rotation of
the earth, and, as they depend upon the motion of the disturbing
body in its orbit, they are of long periods. The second kind of
oscillations depend upon the rotation of the earth, therefore their
period is nearly a day. The oscillations of the third kind vary
96with an angle equal to twice the angular rotation of the earth,
and consequently happen twice in twenty-four hours (N. 157).
The first afford no particular interest, and are extremely small;
but the difference of two consecutive tides depends upon the
second. At the time of the solstices this difference, which ought
to be very great according to Newton’s theory, is hardly sensible
on our shores. La Place has shown that the discrepancy arises
from the depth of the sea, and that if the depth were uniform
there would be no difference in the consecutive tides but that
which is occasioned by local circumstances. It follows, therefore,
that, as this difference is extremely small, the sea, considered
in a large extent, must be nearly of uniform depth, that is to
say, there is a certain mean depth from which the deviation is
not great. The mean depth of the Pacific Ocean is supposed to
be about four or five miles, that of the Atlantic only three or
four, which, however, is mere conjecture. Possibly the great
extent and uniformly small depth of the Atlantic over the telegraphic
platform may prevent the difference of the oscillations
in question from being perceptible on our shores. From the
formulæ which determine the difference of these consecutive
tides it is proved that the precession of the equinoxes and the
nutation of the earth’s axis are the same as if the sea formed one
solid mass with the earth.
The oscillations of the third kind are the semi-diurnal tides
so remarkable on our coasts. In these there are two phenomena
particularly to be distinguished, one occurring twice in a month,
the other twice in a year.
The first phenomenon is, that the tides are much increased in
the syzygies (N. 158), or at the time of new and full moon: in
both cases the sun and moon are in the same meridian; for when
the moon is new they are in conjunction, and when she is full
they are in opposition. In each of these positions their action is
combined to produce the highest or spring tides under that meridian,
and the lowest in those points that are 90° distant. It is
observed that the higher the sea rises in full tide, the lower it is
in the ebb. The neap tides take place when the moon is in
quadrature. They neither rise so high nor sink so low as the
spring tides. It is evident that the spring tides must happen
twice in a month, since in that time the moon is once new and
once full. Theory proves that each partial tide increases as the
97cube of the parallax or apparent diameter of the body producing
it, for the greater the apparent diameter the nearer the body
and the more intense its action upon the sea; hence the spring
tides are much increased when the moon is in perigee, for then
she is nearest to the earth.
The second phenomenon in the tides is the augmentation
occurring at the time of the equinoxes, when the sun’s declination
is zero (N. 159), which happens twice in every year. The
spring tides which take place at that time are often much increased
by the equinoctial gales, and, on the hypothesis of the
whole earth covered by the ocean, would be the greatest possible
if the line of the moon’s nodes coincided with that of her perigee,
for then the whole action of the luminaries would be in the plane
of the equator. But since the Antarctic Ocean is the source of
the tides, it is evident that the spring tide must be greatest
when the moon is in perigee, and when both luminaries have
their highest southern declination, for then they act most directly
upon the great circuit of the south polar seas.
The sun and moon are continually making the circuit of the
heavens at different distances from the plane of the equator, on
account of the obliquity of the ecliptic and the inclination of the
lunar orbit. The moon takes about
291⁄2
days to vary through all
her declinations, which sometimes extend
283⁄4°
on each side of
the equator, while the sun requires nearly
3651⁄4
days to accomplish
his motions through
231⁄2°
on each side of the same plane,
so that their combined action causes great variations in the tides.
Both the height and time of high water are perpetually changing,
and, although the problem does not admit of a general solution,
it is necessary to analyse the phenomena which ought to arise
from the attraction of the sun and moon, but the result must
be corrected in each particular case for local circumstances, so
that the theory of the tides in each port becomes really a matter
of experiment, and can only be determined by means of a vast
number of observations, including many revolutions of the
moon’s nodes.
The mean height of the tides will be increased by a very small
quantity for ages to come, in consequence of the decrease in the
mean distance of the moon from the earth; the contrary effect
will take place after that period has elapsed, and the moon’s
mean distance begins to increase again, which it will continue to
98do for many ages. Thus the mean distance of the moon and the
consequent minute increase in the height of the tides will oscillate
between fixed limits for ever.
The height to which the tides rise is much greater in narrow
channels than in the open sea, on account of the obstructions they
meet with. The sea is so pent up in the British Channel that
the tides sometimes rise as much as fifty feet at St. Malo, on the
coast of France; whereas on the shores of some of the South Sea
islands, near the centre of the Pacific, they do not exceed one or
two feet. The winds have great influence on the height of the
tides, according as they conspire with or oppose them. But the
actual effect of the wind in exciting the waves of the ocean
extends very little below the surface. Even in the most violent
storms the water is probably calm at the depth of ninety or a
hundred fathoms. The tidal wave of the ocean does not reach
the Mediterranean nor the Baltic, partly from their position and
partly from the narrowness of the Straits of Gibraltar and of the
Categat, but it is very perceptible in the Red Sea and in Hudson’s
Bay. The ebb and flow of the sea are perceptible in rivers to a
very great distance from their estuaries. In the Narrows of Pauxis,
in the river of the Amazons, more than five hundred miles from
the sea, the tides are evident. It requires so many days for the
tide to ascend this mighty stream, that the returning tides meet a
succession of those which are coming up; so that every possible
variety occurs at some part or other of its shores, both as to magnitude
and time. It requires a very wide expanse of water to
accumulate the impulse of the sun and moon, so as to render their
influence sensible; on that account the tides in the Mediterranean
and Black Sea are scarcely perceptible.
These perpetual commotions in the waters are occasioned by
forces that bear a very small proportion to terrestrial gravitation:
the sun’s action in raising the ocean is only the
1⁄38448000
of gravitation
at the earth’s surface, and the action of the moon is little
more than twice as much; these forces being in the ratio of
1 to 2.35333, when the sun and moon are at their mean distances
from the earth. From this ratio the mass of the moon is found
to be only the
1⁄75
part of that of the earth. Had the action of the
sun on the ocean been exactly equal to that of the moon, there
would have been no neap tides, and the spring tides would have
been of twice the height which the action of either the sun or
99moon would have produced separately—a phenomenon depending
upon the interference of the waves or undulations.
A stone plunged into a pool of still water occasions a series of
waves to advance along the surface, though the water itself is
not carried forward, but only rises into heights and sinks into
hollows, each portion of the surface being elevated and depressed
in its turn. Another stone of the same size, thrown into the
water near the first, will occasion a similar set of undulations.
Then, if an equal and similar wave from each stone arrive at the
same spot at the same time, so that the elevation of the one
exactly coincides with the elevation of the other, their united
effect will produce a wave twice the size of either. But, if one
wave precede the other by exactly half an undulation, the elevation
of the one will coincide with the hollow of the other, and the
hollow of the one with the elevation of the other; and the waves
will so entirely obliterate one another, that the surface of the
water will remain smooth and level. Hence, if the length of
each wave be represented by 1, they will destroy one another at
intervals of
1⁄2,
3⁄2,
5⁄2,
&c., and will combine their effects at the intervals
1, 2, 3, &c. It will be found according to this principle,
when still water is disturbed by the fall of two equal stones, that
there are certain lines on its surface of a hyperbolic form, where
the water is smooth in consequence of the waves obliterating each
other, and that the elevation of the water in the adjacent parts
corresponds to both the waves united (N. 160). Now, in the
spring and neap tides arising from the combination of the simple
solilunar waves, the spring tide is the joint result of the combination
when they coincide in time and place; and the neap tide
happens when they succeed each other by half an interval, so as
to leave only the effect of their difference sensible. It is, therefore,
evident that, if the solar and lunar tides were of the same height,
there would be no difference, consequently no neap tides, and the
spring tides would be twice as high as either separately. In the
port of Batsha, in Tonquin, where the tides arrive by two channels
of lengths corresponding to half an interval, there is neither high
nor low water on account of the interference of the waves.
The initial state of the ocean has no influence on the tides; for,
whatever its primitive conditions may have been, they must soon
have vanished by the friction and mobility of the fluid. One of
the most remarkable circumstances in the theory of the tides is
100the assurance that, in consequence of the density of the sea being
only one-fifth of the mean density of the earth, and the earth itself
increasing in density towards the centre, the stability of the equilibrium
of the ocean never can be subverted by any physical cause.
A general inundation arising from the mere instability of the
ocean is therefore impossible. A variety of circumstances, however,
tend to produce partial variations in the equilibrium of the
seas, which is restored by means of currents. Winds and the
periodical melting of the ice at the poles occasion temporary watercourses;
but by far the most important causes are the centrifugal
force induced by the velocity of the earth’s rotation, and variations
in the density of the sea.
The centrifugal force may be resolved into two forces—one
perpendicular, and another tangent to the earth’s surface (N. 161).
The tangential force, though small, is sufficient to make the fluid
particles within the polar circles tend towards the equator, and
the tendency is much increased by the immense evaporation in
the equatorial regions from the heat of the sun, which disturbs
the equilibrium of the ocean. To this may also be added the
superior density of the waters near the poles, from their low temperature.
In consequence of the combination of all these circumstances,
two great currents perpetually set from each pole towards
the equator. But, as they come from latitudes where the rotatory
motion of the surface of the earth is very much less than it is
between the tropics, on account of their inertia, they do not immediately
acquire the velocity with which the solid part of the
earth’s surface is revolving at the equatorial regions; from whence
it follows that, within twenty-five or thirty degrees on each side
of the line, the ocean has a general motion from east to west,
which is much increased by the action of the trade winds. Both
in the Pacific and Atlantic currents of enormous magnitude are
deflected by the continents and islands to the north and south
from this mighty mass of rushing waters, which convey the
warmth of the equator to temper the severity of the polar regions,
while to maintain the equilibrium of the seas counter currents of
cold water are poured from the polar oceans to mingle with the
warm waters at the line, so that a perpetual circulation is maintained.
Icebergs are sometimes drifted as far as the Azores from the
Polar seas, and from the south pole they have come even to the
101Cape of Good Hope. But the ice which encircles the south pole
extends to lower latitudes by 10° than that which surrounds the
north. In consequence of the polar current Sir Edward Parry
was obliged to give up his attempt to reach the north pole in the
year 1827, because the fields of ice were drifting to the south
faster than his party could travel over them to the north.
Kotzebue and Sir James Ross found a stratum of constant temperature
in the ocean at a depth depending upon the latitude: at
the equator it is at the depth of 7200 feet, from whence it gradually
rises till it comes to the surface in both hemispheres about the
latitude of 56° 26ʹ, where the water has the same temperature at
all depths; it then descends to 4500 feet below the surface about
the 70th parallel both in the Arctic and Antarctic Seas. The
temperature of that aqueous zone is about 39°·5 of Fahrenheit.[7]
It divides the surface of the ocean into five great zones of temperature,
namely, a medial region, in which the highest mean
temperature is 82° Fahr., two temperate zones each of 39°·5
Fahr., and two polar basins at the freezing point of salt water.</div></body></text></TEI>