<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="24">
199
SECTION XXIII.

Objections to the Undulatory Theory, from a difference in the Action of
Sound and Light under the same circumstances, removed—The Dispersion
of Light according to the Undulatory Theory—Arago’s final proof
that the Undulatory Theory is the Law of Nature.
The numerous phenomena of periodical colours arising from the
interference of light, which do not admit of satisfactory explanation
on any other principle than the undulatory theory, are the
strongest arguments in favour of that hypothesis; and even
cases which at one time seemed unfavourable to that doctrine
have proved upon investigation to proceed from it alone. Such
is the erroneous objection which has been made, in consequence
of a difference in the mode of action of light and sound, under
the same circumstances, in one particular instance. When a
ray of light from a luminous point, and a diverging sound, are
both transmitted through a very small hole into a dark room,
the light goes straight forward and illuminates a small spot on
the opposite wall, leaving the rest in darkness; whereas the
sound on entering diverges in all directions, and is heard in
every part of the room. These phenomena, however, instead of
being at variance with the undulatory theory, are direct consequences
of it, arising from the very great difference between the
magnitude of the undulations of sound and those of light. The
undulations of light are incomparably less than the minute
aperture, while those of sound are much greater. Therefore
when light, diverging from a luminous point, enters the hole,
the rays round its edges are oblique, and consequently of different
lengths, while those in the centre are direct, and nearly
or altogether of the same lengths. So that the small undulations
between the centre and the edges are in different phases,
that is, in different states of undulation. Therefore the greater
number of them interfere, and by destroying one another produce
darkness all around the edges of the aperture; whereas the
central rays, having the same phases, combine, and produce a
spot of bright light on a wall or screen directly opposite the hole.
200The waves of air producing sound, on the contrary, being very
large compared with the hole, do not sensibly diverge in passing
through it, and are therefore all so nearly of the same length,
and consequently in the same phase or state of undulation, that
none of them interfere sufficiently to destroy one another.
Hence all the particles of air in the room are set into a state of
vibration, so that the intensity of the sound is very nearly
everywhere the same. Strong as the preceding cases may be,
the following experiment, made by M. Arago, seems to be decisive
in favour of the undulatory doctrine. Suppose a plano-convex
lens of very great radius to be placed upon a plate of
very highly polished metal. When a ray of polarized light
falls upon this apparatus at a very great angle of incidence,
Newton’s rings are seen at the point of contact. But as the
polarizing angle of glass differs from that of metal, when the
light falls on the lens at the polarizing angle of glass, the black
spot and the system of rings vanish. For although light in
abundance continues to be reflected from the surface of the
metal, not a ray is reflected from the surface of the glass that
is in contact with it, consequently no interference can take
place; which proves beyond a doubt that Newton’s rings result
from the interference of the light reflected from both the surfaces
apparently in contact (N. 199).
Notwithstanding the successful adaptation of the undulatory
system to phenomena, the dispersion of light for a long time
offered a formidable objection to that theory, which has been
removed by Professor Powell of Oxford.
A sunbeam falling on a prism, instead of being refracted to a
single point of white light, is separated into its component
colours, which are dispersed or scattered unequally over a considerable
space, of which the portion occupied by the red rays is
the least, and that over which the violet rays are dispersed is the
greatest. Thus the rays of the coloured spectrum, whose waves
are of different lengths, have different degrees of refrangibility,
and consequently move with different velocities, either in the
medium which conveys the light from the sun, or in the refracting
medium, or in both; whereas rays of all colours come from
the sun to the earth with the same velocity. If, indeed,
the velocities of the various rays were different in space, the
aberration of the fixed stars, which is inversely as the velocity,
201would be different for different colours, and every star would
appear as a spectrum whose length would be parallel to the
direction of the earth’s motion, which is not found to agree
with observation. Besides, there is no such difference in the
velocities of the long and short waves of air in the analogous
case of sound, since notes of the lowest and highest pitch are
heard in the order in which they are struck. In fact, when the
sunbeam passes from air into the prism, its velocity is diminished;
and, as its refraction, and consequently its dispersion,
depend solely upon the diminished velocity of the transmission
of its waves, they ought to be the same for waves of all lengths,
unless a connexion exists between the length of a wave and the
velocity with which it is propagated. Now, this connexion
between the length of a wave of any colour, and its velocity or
refrangibility in a given medium, has been deduced by Professor
Powell from M. Cauchy’s investigations of the properties of light
on a peculiar modification of the undulatory hypothesis. Hence
the refrangibility of the various coloured rays, computed from
this relation for any given medium, when compared with their
refrangibility in the same medium determined by actual observation,
will show whether the dispersion of light comes under
the laws of that theory. But, in order to accomplish this, it is
clear that the length of the waves should be found independently
of refraction, and a very beautiful discovery of M. Fraunhofer
furnishes the means of doing so.
That philosopher obtained a perfectly pure and complete
coloured spectrum, with all its dark and bright lines, by the
interference of light alone, from a sunbeam passing through a
series of fine parallel wires covering the object glass of a telescope.
In this spectrum, formed independently of prismatic refraction,
the positions of the coloured rays depend only on the lengths of
their waves, and M. Fraunhofer found that the intervals between
them are precisely proportional to the differences of these lengths.
He measured the lengths of the waves of the different colours at
seven fixed points, determined by seven of the principal dark
and bright lines. Professor Powell, availing himself of these
measures, has made the requisite computations, and has found
that the coincidence of theory with observation is perfect for ten
substances whose refrangibility had been previously determined
by the direct measurements of M. Fraunhofer, and for ten others
202whose refrangibility has more recently been ascertained by M.
Rudberg. Thus, in the case of seven rays in each of twenty
different substances, solid and fluid, the dispersion of light takes
place according to the laws of the undulatory theory: and there
can hardly be a doubt that dispersion in all other bodies will be
found to follow the same law. It is, however, an express condition
of the connexion between the velocity of light and the
length of its undulations, that the intervals between the vibrating
molecules of the ethereal fluid should bear a sensible relation to
the length of an undulation. The coincidence of the computed
with the observed refractions shows that this condition is fulfilled
within the refracting media; but the aberration of the fixed stars
leads to the inference that it does not hold in the ethereal regions,
where the velocities of the rays of all colours are the same.
Strong as all that precedes is in favour of the undulatory theory,
the relative velocity of light in air and water is the final and
decisive proof. By the Newtonian theory the velocity is greater
in water than in air, by the undulatory theory it is less; hence if
a comparison could be made it would decide which is the law of
nature. The difficulty consisted in comparing the velocity of
light passing through a small extent of water with the velocity
of light in air, which is 10,000 times greater than the velocity of
the earth in its orbit. This delicate and difficult experiment
was made by means of an instrument invented by Professor
Wheatstone for measuring the velocity of electricity. It consists
of a small mirror which revolves in its own plane like a coin
spinning on its edge. When it revolves very rapidly the reflected
image of an object changes its place perceptibly in an
inconceivably small fraction of a second. The mirrors used in
the experiment were made to revolve more than 1000 times in
a second, by which means the places of the two images—one
from light passing through air, and the other from light passing
through an equal length of water—were found to be such as to
prove that the velocity of light in air and in water is as 4 to 3,
while by the Newtonian theory it is as 3 to 4. By this final
and decisive proof the undulatory theory may from henceforth
be regarded as the law of nature. This experiment was accomplished
by M. Fizeau and M. Léon-Faucault, at the suggestion
of M. Arago, whose eyesight did not permit him to undertake it
himself.</div></body></text></TEI>