<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="34">
330
SECTION XXXIII.

Electricity produced by Rotation—Direction of the Currents—Electricity
from the Rotation of a Magnet—M. Arago’s Experiment explained—Rotation
of a Plate of Iron between the Poles of a Magnet—Relation of
Substances to Magnets of three Kinds—Thermo-Electricity.
M. Arago discovered a source of magnetism in rotatory motion.
If a circular plate of copper be made to revolve immediately
above or below a magnetic needle or magnet, suspended in such
a manner that it may rotate in a plane parallel to that of
the copper plate, the magnet tends to follow the circumvolution
of the plate; or, if the magnet revolves, the plate tends to
follow its motion; so powerful is the effect, that magnets and
plates of many pounds weight have been carried round. This is
quite independent of the motion of the air, since it is the same
when a pane of glass is interposed between the magnet and the
copper. When the magnet and the plate are at rest, not the
smallest effect, attractive, repulsive, or of any kind, can be perceived
between them. In describing this phenomenon, M. Arago
states that it takes place not only with metals, but with all substances,
solids, liquids, and even gases, although the intensity
depends upon the kind of substance in motion. Experiments
made by Dr. Faraday explain this singular action. He found
that, if a piece of metal or a metallic wire forming a circuit of any
form be moved from right to left across the lines of force proceeding
from the pole of a bar magnet, these lines of force induce
a current of electricity flowing in one direction; and when the
motion of the metal or wire is reversed, the direction of the
current is reversed also: the rotation of the magnet about its axis
has no effect on these results, and no current is induced when the
metal or wire is at rest. A plate of copper, twelve inches in
diameter and one fifth of an inch thick, was placed between the
poles of a powerful horseshoe magnet, consequently crossing the
magnetic lines of force at right angles, and connected at certain
points with a galvanometer by copper wires. When the plate
was at rest no effect was produced; but as soon as the plate was
331made to revolve rapidly the galvanometer needle was deflected
sometimes as much as 90°, and by a uniform rotation the deflection
was constantly maintained at 45°. When the motion of the
copper plate was reversed, the needle was deflected in the contrary
direction, and thus a permanent current of electricity was
evolved by an ordinary magnet. The intensity of the electricity
collected by the wires, and conveyed by them to the galvanometer,
varied with the position of the plate relatively to the poles of the
magnet.
The motion of the electricity in the copper plate may be conceived
by considering that, merely by moving a single wire, like
the spoke of a wheel, before a magnetic pole, a current of electricity
tends to flow through it from one end to the other.
Hence, if a wheel be constructed of a great many such spokes,
and revolved near the pole of a magnet in the manner of the
copper disc, each radius or spoke will tend to have a current produced
in it as it passes the pole. Now, as the circular plate is
nothing more than an infinite number of radii or spokes in contact,
the currents will flow in the direction of the radii if a
channel be open for their return; and, in a continuous plate,
that channel is afforded by the lateral portions on each side of
the particular radius close to the magnetic pole. This hypothesis
is confirmed by observation; for the currents of positive electricity
set from the centre to the circumference, and the negative
from the circumference to the centre, and vice versâ, according to
the position of the magnetic poles and the direction of rotation;
so that a collecting wire at the centre of the copper plate conveys
positive electricity to the galvanometer in one case, and negative
in another; that collected by a conducting wire in contact with
the circumference of the plate is always the opposite of the electricity
conveyed from the centre. It is evident that, when the
plate and magnet are both at rest, no effect takes place, since the
electric currents which cause the deflection of the galvanometer
are only induced by motion across the magnetic lines of force.
When the plate is placed edgewise so as to be parallel to these
lines of force, no revolution of it with the most powerful magnet
produces the slightest signs of a current at the galvanometer.
The same phenomena may be produced by electro-magnets. The
effects are similar when the magnet rotates and the plate remains
at rest. When the magnet revolves uniformly about its own
332axis, electricity of the same kind is collected at its poles, and the
opposite electricity at its equator.
The phenomena which take place in M. Arago’s experiments
may be explained on this principle. When both the copper
plate and the magnet are revolving, the action of the induced
electric current tends continually to diminish their relative
motion, and to bring the moving bodies into a state of relative
rest; so that, if one be made to revolve by an extraneous force,
the other will tend to revolve about it in the same direction, and
with the same velocity.
When a plate of iron, or of any substance capable of being
made either a temporary or permanent magnet, revolves between
the poles of a magnet, it is found that dissimilar poles on opposite
sides of the plate neutralize each other’s effects, so that no
electricity is evolved; while similar poles on each side of the
revolving plate increase the quantity of electricity, and a single
pole end-on is sufficient. But when copper, and substances not
sensible to ordinary magnetic impressions, revolve, similar poles
on opposite sides of the plate neutralize each other; dissimilar
poles on each side exalt the action; and a single pole at the edge
of the revolving plate, or end-on, does nothing. This forms a
test for distinguishing the ordinary magnetic force from that produced
by rotation. If unlike poles, that is, a north and south
pole, produce more effect than one pole, the force will be due to
electric currents; if similar poles produce more effect than one,
then the power is not electric. These investigations show that
there are really very few bodies magnetic in the manner of iron.
Dr. Faraday therefore arranges substances in three classes, with
regard to their relation to magnets:—those affected by the magnet
when at rest, like iron, steel, and nickel, which possess ordinary
magnetic properties; those affected when in motion, in
which electric currents are evolved by the inductive force of the
magnet, such as copper; and, lastly, those which are perfectly
indifferent to the magnet, whether at rest or in motion.
It has already been observed that three bodies are requisite to
form a galvanic circuit, one of which must be fluid. But, in
1822, Professor Seebeck, of Berlin, discovered that electric currents
may be produced by the partial application of heat to a circuit
formed of two solid conductors. For example, when a semicircle
of bismuth, joined to a semicircle of antimony, so as to form a
333ring, is heated at one of the junctions by a lamp, a current of
electricity flows through the circuit from the antimony to the
bismuth; and such thermo-electric currents produce all the electro-magnetic
effects. A compass needle, placed either within or
without the circuit, and at a small distance from it, is deflected
from its natural position, in a direction corresponding to the way
in which the electricity is flowing. If such a ring be suspended
so as to move easily in any direction, it will obey the action of
a magnet brought near it, and may even be made to revolve.
According to the researches of M. Seebeck, the same substance,
unequally heated, exhibits electrical currents; and M. Nobili
observed, that in all metals, except zinc, iron, and antimony, the
electricity flows from the hot part towards that which is cold.
That philosopher attributes terrestrial magnetism to a difference
in the action of heat on the various substances of which the crust
of the earth is composed; and, in confirmation of his views, he
has produced electrical currents by the contact of two pieces of
moist clay, of which one was hotter than the other.
M. Becquerel constructed a thermo-electric battery of one
kind of metal, by which he has determined the relation between
the heat employed and the intensity of the resulting electricity.
He found that, in most metals, the intensity of the current increases
with the heat to a certain limit, but that this law extends
much farther in metals that are difficult to fuse, and which do
not rust. The experiments of Professor Cumming show that
the mutual action of a magnet and a thermo-electric current is
subject to the same laws as those of magnets and galvanic
currents; consequently all the phenomena of repulsion, attraction,
and rotation may be exhibited by a thermo-electric current.
M. Botto, of Turin, has decomposed water and some solutions by
thermo-electricity; and the Cav. Antinori of Florence succeeded
in obtaining a brilliant spark with the aid of an electro-dynamic
coil.
The principle of thermo-electricity has been employed by MM.
Nobili and Melloni for measuring extremely minute quantities
of heat in their experiments on the instantaneous transmission of
radiant heat. The thermo-multiplier, which they constructed
for that purpose, consists of a series of alternate bars, or rather
fine wires of bismuth and antimony, placed side by side, and the
extremities alternately soldered together. When heat is applied
334to one end of this apparatus, the other remaining at its natural
temperature, currents of electricity flow through each pair of
bars, which are conveyed by wires to a delicate galvanometer, the
needle of which points out the intensity of the electricity conveyed,
and consequently that of the heat employed. This instrument
is so delicate that the comparative warmth of different
insects has been ascertained by means of it.
The conservation of force is strictly maintained throughout the
whole science and different forms of electricity. In static electricity
the positive and negative forces exactly balance one
another; they are always simultaneous, and related often by
curved lines of force; there is no defect or surplus, and the existence
of one kind without the other is utterly impossible—it is
absolutely a dual force. The very same may be said of electric
currents, whether produced by the Voltaic battery or in any other
way—the current in one part of the circuit is absolutely the same
in amount and dual character as the other; and in the insulated
Voltaic battery, where the sustaining power is internal, not the
slightest development of the forces of either of these can occur
till the circuit is completed or induction allowed at the extremities;
for if when there is no circuit the induction be prevented,
not merely no current, but no quantity of electricity at the poles
ready to produce a current, can be evolved in the slightest
degree.[17]</div></body></text></TEI>