<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="4">
13
SECTION III.

Perturbations, Periodic and Secular—Disturbing Action equivalent to
three Partial Forces—Tangential Force the cause of the Periodic Inequalities
in Longitude, and Secular Inequalities in the Form and Position
of the Orbit in its own Plane—Radial Force the cause of Variations in
the Planet’s Distance from the Sun—It combines with the Tangential
Force to produce the Secular Variations in the Form and Position of the
Orbit in its own Plane—Perpendicular Force the cause of Periodic
Perturbations in Latitude, and Secular Variations in the Position of the
Orbit with regard to the Plane of the Ecliptic—Mean Motion and
Major Axis Invariable—Stability of System—Effects of a Resisting
Medium—Invariable Plane of the Solar System and of the Universe—Great
Inequality of Jupiter and Saturn.
The planets are subject to disturbances of two kinds, both
resulting from the constant operation of their reciprocal attraction:
one kind, depending upon their positions with regard to
each other, begins from zero, increases to a maximum, decreases,
and becomes zero again, when the planets return to the same
relative positions. In consequence of these, the disturbed planet
is sometimes drawn away from the sun, sometimes brought
nearer to him: sometimes it is accelerated in its motion, and
sometimes retarded. At one time it is drawn above the plane
of its orbit, at another time below it, according to the position
of the disturbing body. All such changes, being accomplished
in short periods, some in a few months, others in years, or in
hundreds of years, are denominated periodic inequalities. The
inequalities of the other kind, though occasioned likewise by the
disturbing energy of the planets, are entirely independent of
their relative positions. They depend upon the relative positions
of the orbits alone, whose forms and places in space are
altered by very minute quantities, in immense periods of time,
and are therefore called secular inequalities.
The periodical perturbations are compensated when the bodies
return to the same relative positions with regard to one another
and to the sun: the secular inequalities are compensated when
14the orbits return to the same positions relatively to one another
and to the plane of the ecliptic.
Planetary motion, including both these kinds of disturbance,
may be represented by a body revolving in an ellipse, and making
small and transient deviations, now on one side of its path, and
now on the other, whilst the ellipse itself is slowly, but perpetually,
changing both in form and position.
The periodic inequalities are merely transient deviations of a
planet from its path, the most remarkable of which only lasts
about 918 years; but, in consequence of the secular disturbances,
the apsides, or extremities of the major axes of all the orbits,
have a direct but variable motion in space, excepting those of
the orbit of Venus, which are retrograde (N. 61), and the lines
of the nodes move with a variable velocity in a contrary direction.
Besides these, the inclination and excentricity of every orbit are
in a state of perpetual but slow change. These effects result
from the disturbing action of all the planets on each. But, as
it is only necessary to estimate the disturbing influence of one
body at a time, what follows may convey some idea of the
manner in which one planet disturbs the elliptical motion of
another.
Suppose two planets moving in ellipses round the sun; if one
of them attracted the other and the sun with equal intensity,
and in parallel directions (N. 62), it would have no effect in
disturbing the elliptical motion. The inequality of this attraction
is the sole cause of perturbation, and the difference between
the disturbing planet’s action on the sun and on the disturbed
planet constitutes the disturbing force, which consequently varies
in intensity and direction with every change in the relative positions
of the three bodies. Although both the sun and planet
are under the influence of the disturbing force, the motion of the
disturbed planet is referred to the centre of the sun as a fixed
point, for convenience. The whole force (N. 63) which disturbs
a planet is equivalent to three partial forces. One of these acts
on the disturbed planet, in the direction of a tangent to its orbit,
and is called the tangential force: it occasions secular inequalities
in the form and position of the orbit in its own plane, and is
the sole cause of the periodical perturbations in the planet’s
longitude. Another acts upon the same body in the direction
of its radius vector, that is, in the line joining the centres of
15the sun and planet, and is called the radial force: it produces
periodical changes in the distance of the planet from the sun,
and affects the form and position of the orbit in its own plane.
The third, which may be called the perpendicular force, acts at
right angles to the plane of the orbit, occasions the periodic
inequalities in the planet’s latitude, and affects the position of
the orbit with regard to the plane of the ecliptic.
It has been observed, that the radius vector of a planet,
moving in a perfectly elliptical orbit, passes over equal spaces
or areas in equal times; a circumstance which is independent of
the law of the force, and would be the same whether it varied
inversely as the square of the distance, or not, provided only
that it be directed to the centre of the sun. Hence the tangential
force, not being directed to the centre, occasions an unequable
description of areas, or, what is the same thing, it disturbs the
motion of the planet in longitude. The tangential force sometimes
accelerates the planet’s motion, sometimes retards it, and
occasionally has no effect at all. Were the orbits of both planets
circular, a complete compensation would take place at each revolution
of the two planets, because the arcs in which the accelerations
and retardations take place would be symmetrical on each
side of the disturbing force. For it is clear, that if the motion
be accelerated through a certain space, and then retarded through
as much, the motion at the end of the time will be the same as
if no change had taken place. But, as the orbits of the planets
are ellipses, this symmetry does not hold: for, as the planet
moves unequably in its orbit, it is in some positions more
directly, and for a longer time, under the influence of the disturbing
force than in others. And, although multitudes of
variations do compensate each other in short periods, there are
others, depending on peculiar relations among the periodic times
of the planets, which do not compensate each other till after one,
or even till after many revolutions of both bodies. A periodical
inequality of this kind in the motions of Jupiter and Saturn has
a period of no less than 918 years.
The radial force, or that part of the disturbing force which
acts in the direction of the line joining the centres of the sun
and disturbed planet, has no effect on the areas, but is the cause
of periodical changes of small extent in the distance of the planet
from the sun. It has already been shown, that the force producing
16perfectly elliptical motion varies inversely as the square
of the distance, and that a force following any other law would
cause the body to move in a curve of a very different kind.
Now, the radial disturbing force varies directly as the distance;
and, as it sometimes combines with and increases the intensity
of the sun’s attraction for the disturbed body, and at other times
opposes and consequently diminishes it, in both cases it causes
the sun’s attraction to deviate from the exact law of gravity,
and the whole action of this compound central force on the disturbed
body is either greater or less than what is requisite for
perfectly elliptical motion. When greater, the curvature of the
disturbed planet’s path, on leaving its perihelion (N. 64), or
point nearest the sun, is greater than it would be in the ellipse,
which brings the planet to its aphelion (N. 65), or point farthest
from the sun, before it has passed through 180°, as it would do
if undisturbed. So that in this case the apsides, or extremities
of the major axis, advance in space. When the central force is
less than the law of gravity requires, the curvature of the
planet’s path is less than the curvature of the ellipse. So that
the planet, on leaving its perihelion, would pass through more
than 180° before arriving at its aphelion, which causes the apsides
to recede in space (N. 66). Cases both of advance and recess
occur during a revolution of the two planets; but those in which
the apsides advance preponderate. This, however, is not the
full amount of the motion of the apsides; part arises also from
the tangential force (N. 63), which alternately accelerates and
retards the velocity of the disturbed planet. An increase in the
planet’s tangential velocity diminishes the curvature of its orbit,
and is equivalent to a decrease of central force. On the contrary,
a decrease of the tangential velocity, which increases the curvature
of the orbit, is equivalent to an increase of central force.
These fluctuations, owing to the tangential force, occasion an
alternate recess and advance of the apsides, after the manner
already explained (N. 66). An uncompensated portion of the
direct motion, arising from this cause, conspires with that already
impressed by the radial force, and in some cases even nearly
doubles the direct motion of these points. The motion of the
apsides may be represented by supposing a planet to move in
an ellipse, while the ellipse itself is slowly revolving about the
sun in the same plane (N. 67). This motion of the major axis,
17which is direct in all the orbits except that of the planet Venus,
is irregular, and so slow that it requires more than 109,830
years for the major axis of the earth’s orbit to accomplish a
sidereal revolution (N. 68), that is, to return to the same stars;
and 20,984 years to complete its tropical revolution (N. 69), or
to return to the same equinox. The difference between these
two periods arises from a retrograde motion in the equinoctial
point, which meets the advancing axis before it has completed
its revolution with regard to the stars. The major axis of
Jupiter’s orbit requires no less than 200,610 years to perform its
sidereal revolution, and 22,748 years to accomplish its tropical
revolution from the disturbing action of Saturn alone.
A variation in the excentricity of the disturbed planet’s orbit
is an immediate consequence of the deviation from elliptical
curvature, caused by the action of the disturbing force. When
the path of the body, in proceeding from its perihelion to its
aphelion, is more curved than it ought to be from the effect of
the disturbing forces, it falls within the elliptical orbit, the
excentricity is diminished, and the orbit becomes more nearly
circular; when that curvature is less than it ought to be, the
path of the planet falls without its elliptical orbit (N. 66), and
the excentricity is increased; during these changes, the length of
the major axis is not altered, the orbit only bulges out, or
becomes more flat (N. 70). Thus the variation in the excentricity
arises from the same cause that occasions the motion of
the apsides (N. 67). There is an inseparable connection between
these two elements: they vary simultaneously, and have the
same period; so that, whilst the major axis revolves in an immense
period of time, the excentricity increases and decreases by
very small quantities, and at length returns to its original magnitude
at each revolution of the apsides. The terrestrial excentricity
is decreasing at the rate of about 40 miles annually; and,
if it were to decrease equably, it would be 39,861 years before
the earth’s orbit became a circle. The mutual action of Jupiter
and Saturn occasions variations in the excentricity of both orbits,
the greatest excentricity of Jupiter’s orbit corresponding to the
least of Saturn’s. The period in which these vicissitudes are
accomplished is 70,414 years, estimating the action of these two
planets alone; but, if the action of all the planets were estimated,
the cycle would extend to millions of years.
18That part of the disturbing force is now to be considered which
acts perpendicularly to the plane of the orbit, causing periodic
perturbations in latitude, secular variations in the inclination of
the orbit, and a retrograde motion to its nodes on the true plane
of the ecliptic (N. 71). This force tends to pull the disturbed
body above, or push (N. 72) it below, the plane of its orbit,
according to the relative positions of the two planets with regard
to the sun, considered to be fixed. By this action, it sometimes
makes the plane of the orbit of the disturbed body tend to coincide
with the plane of the ecliptic, and sometimes increases its
inclination to that plane. In consequence of which, its nodes
alternately recede or advance on the ecliptic (N. 73). When
the disturbing planet is in the line of the disturbed planet’s nodes
(N. 74), it neither affects these points, the latitude, nor the
inclination, because both planets are then in the same plane.
When it is at right angles to the line of the nodes, and the orbit
symmetrical on each side of the disturbing force, the average
motion of these points, after a revolution of the disturbed body,
is retrograde, and comparatively rapid: but, when the disturbing
planet is so situated that the orbit of the disturbed planet is not
symmetrical on each side of the disturbing force, which is most
frequently the case, every possible variety of action takes place.
Consequently, the nodes are perpetually advancing or receding
with unequal velocity; but, as a compensation is not effected,
their motion is, on the whole, retrograde.
With regard to the variations in the inclination, it is clear,
that, when the orbit is symmetrical on each side of the disturbing
force, all its variations are compensated after a revolution
of the disturbed body, and are merely periodical perturbations
in the planet’s latitude; and no secular change is induced
in the inclination of the orbit. When, on the contrary, that
orbit is not symmetrical on each side of the disturbing force,
although many of the variations in latitude are transient or
periodical, still, after a complete revolution of the disturbed
body, a portion remains uncompensated, which forms a secular
change in the inclination of the orbit to the plane of the ecliptic.
It is true, part of this secular change in the inclination is compensated
by the revolution of the disturbing body, whose motion
has not hitherto been taken into the account, so that perturbation
compensates perturbation; but still a comparatively permanent
19change is effected in the inclination, which is not compensated
till the nodes have accomplished a complete revolution.
The changes in the inclination are extremely minute (N. 75),
compared with the motion of the nodes, and there is the same
kind of inseparable connection between their secular changes
that there is between the variation of the excentricity and the
motion of the major axis. The nodes and inclinations vary
simultaneously; their periods are the same, and very great. The
nodes of Jupiter’s orbit, from the action of Saturn alone, require
36,261 years to accomplish even a tropical revolution. In what
precedes, the influence of only one disturbing body has been
considered; but, when the action and reaction of the whole
system are taken into account, every planet is acted upon, and
does itself act, in this manner, on all the others; and the joint
effect keeps the inclinations and excentricities in a state of perpetual
variation. It makes the major axes of all the orbits continually
revolve, and causes, on an average, a retrograde motion
of the nodes of each orbit upon every other. The ecliptic (N. 71)
itself is in motion from the mutual action of the earth and
planets, so that the whole is a compound phenomenon of great
complexity, extending through unknown ages. At the present
time the inclinations of all the orbits are decreasing, but so
slowly, that the inclination of Jupiter’s orbit is only about six
minutes less than it was in the age of Ptolemy.
But, in the midst of all these vicissitudes, the length of the
major axes and the mean motions of the planets remain permanently
independent of secular changes. They are so connected
by Kepler’s law, of the squares of the periodic times being proportional
to the cubes of the mean distances of the planets from
the sun, that one cannot vary without affecting the other. And
it is proved, that any variations which do take place are transient,
and depend only on the relative positions of the bodies.
It is true that, according to theory, the radial disturbing force
should permanently alter the dimensions of all the orbits, and
the periodic times of all the planets, to a certain degree. For
example, the masses of all the planets revolving within the orbit
of any one, such as Mars, by adding to the interior mass, increase
the attracting force of the sun, which, therefore, must contract
the dimensions of the orbit of that planet, and diminish its
periodic time; whilst the planets exterior to Mars’s orbit must
20have the contrary effect. But the mass of the whole of the
planets and satellites taken together is so small, when compared
with that of the sun, that these effects are quite insensible, and
could only have been discovered by theory. And, as it is certain
that the length of the major axes and the mean motions are
not permanently changed by any other power whatever, it may
be concluded that they are invariable.
With the exception of these two elements, it appears that all
the bodies are in motion, and every orbit in a state of perpetual
change. Minute as these changes are, they might be supposed
to accumulate in the course of ages, sufficiently to derange the
whole order of nature, to alter the relative positions of the planets,
to put an end to the vicissitudes of the seasons, and to bring
about collisions which would involve our whole system, now so
harmonious, in chaotic confusion. It is natural to inquire, what
proof exists that nature will be preserved from such a catastrophe?
Nothing can be known from observation, since the existence of
the human race has occupied comparatively but a point in duration,
while these vicissitudes embrace myriads of ages. The
proof is simple and conclusive. All the variations of the solar
system, secular as well as periodic, are expressed analytically by
the sines and cosines of circular arcs (N. 76), which increase
with the time; and, as a sine or cosine can never exceed the
radius, but must oscillate between zero and unity, however much
the time may increase, it follows that when the variations have
accumulated to a maximum by slow changes, in however long a
time, they decrease, by the same slow degrees, till they arrive at
their smallest value, again to begin a new course; thus for ever
oscillating about a mean value. This circumstance, however,
would be insufficient, were it not for the small excentricities of
the planetary orbits, their minute inclinations to the plane of the
ecliptic, and the revolutions of all the bodies, as well planets as
satellites, in the same direction. These secure the perpetual
stability of the solar system (N. 77). However, at the time
that the stability was proved by La Grange and La Place, the
telescopic planets between Mars and Jupiter had not been discovered;
but La Grange, having investigated the subject under a
very general point of view, showed that, if a planetary system be
composed of very unequal masses, the whole of the larger would
maintain an unalterable stability with regard to the form and
21position of their orbits, while the orbits of the lesser might
undergo unlimited changes. M. Le Verrier has applied this to the
solar system, and has found that the orbits of all the larger
planets will for ever maintain an unalterable stability in form
and position; for, though liable to mutations of very long periods,
they return again exactly to what they originally were, oscillating
between very narrow limits; but he found a zone of instability
between the orbit of Mars, and twice the mean distance of the
earth from the sun,[1] or between 1·5 and 2·00; therefore the position
and form of the orbits of such of the telescopic planets as
revolve within that zone will be subject to unlimited variations.
But the orbits of those more remote from the sun than Flora, or
beyond 2·20, will be stable, so that their excentricities and inclinations
must always have been, and will always remain, very
great, since they must have depended upon the primitive conditions
that prevailed when these planetary atoms were launched
into space. The 51st of these small bodies, which was discovered,
and the elements of its orbit determined, by M. Valz, at Nimes,
has a mean distance of 1·88; so it revolves within the zone
of instability. It has a shorter periodic time than any of
those previously discovered, and a greater excentricity, with the
exception of Nysa. Its orbit cuts that of Mars, and comes
nearer to the earth than the orbits of either Mars or Venus,
a circumstance which would be favourable for correcting
the parallax of the sun, or confirming its accuracy. The
telescopic planets, numerous as they are, have no influence
on the motions of the larger planets, for Jupiter has a diameter
of 90,734 miles, while that of Pallas, his nearest neighbour, is
only 97 miles, little more than the distance from London to
Bath. The diameter of Mars, on the other side of the small
planets, is 4546 miles, and that of the earth
79251⁄2
miles, so that
the telescopic group are too minute to disturb the others. M.
Le Verrier found another zone of instability between Venus and
the sun, on the border of which Mercury is revolving, the inclination
of whose orbit to the plane of the ecliptic is about 7°, which
is more than that of any of the large planets. Neptune’s
22orbit is, no doubt, as stable as that of any other of the
large planets, as the inclination is very small, but he will
have periodical variations of very long duration from the reciprocal
attraction between him and Uranus, one especially of
an enormous duration, similar to those of Jupiter and Saturn,
and, like them, depending on the time of his revolution round the
sun, being nearly twice as long as that of Saturn. Mr. Adams
has computed that Neptune produces a periodical perturbation
in the motion of Uranus, whose duration is about 6800 years.
The equilibrium of the system, however, would be deranged
if the planets moved in a resisting medium (N. 78) sufficiently
dense to diminish their tangential velocity, for then both the
excentricities and the major axes of the orbits would vary with
the time, so that the stability of the system would be ultimately
destroyed. The existence of an ethereal medium is now proved;
and, although it is so extremely rare that hitherto its effects on
the motions of the planets have been altogether insensible, there
can be no doubt that, in the immensity of time, it will modify
the forms of the planetary orbits, and may at last even cause the
destruction of our system, which in itself contains no principle
of decay, unless a rotatory motion from west to east has been
given to this medium by the bodies of the solar system, which
have all been revolving about the sun in that direction for unknown
ages. This rotation, which seems to be highly probable,
may even have been coeval with its creation. Such a vortex
would have no effect on bodies moving with it, but it would
influence the motions of those revolving in a contrary direction.
It is possible that the disturbances experienced by comets, which
have already revealed the existence of this medium, may also, in
time, disclose its rotatory motion.
The form and position of the planetary orbits, and the motion
of the bodies in the same direction, together with the periodicity
of the terms in which the inequalities are expressed, assure us
that the variations of the system are confined within very
narrow limits, and that, although we do not know the extent of
the limits, nor the period of that grand cycle which probably
embraces millions of years, yet they never will exceed what is
requisite for the stability and harmony of the whole; for the
preservation of which every circumstance is so beautifully and
wonderfully adapted.
23The plane of the ecliptic itself, though assumed to be fixed at
a given epoch for the convenience of astronomical computation, is
subject to a minute secular variation of 45ʺ·7, occasioned by the
reciprocal action of the planets. But, as this is also periodical,
and cannot exceed 2° 42ʹ, the terrestrial equator, which is inclined
to it at an angle[2] of 23° 27ʹ 28ʺ·29, will never coincide with the
plane of the ecliptic: so there never can be perpetual spring
(N. 79). The rotation of the earth is uniform; therefore day
and night, summer and winter, will continue their vicissitudes
while the system endures, or is undisturbed by foreign causes.</div></body></text></TEI>