<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="13">
83
SECTION XII.

Mean and Apparent Sidereal Time—Mean and Apparent Solar Time—Equation
of Time—English and French Subdivisions of Time—Leap
Year—Christian Era—Equinoctial Time—Remarkable Eras depending
upon the Position of the Solar Perigee—Inequality of the
Lengths of the Seasons in the two Hemispheres—Application of Astronomy
to Chronology—English and French Standards of Weights and
Measures.
Astronomy has been of immediate and essential use in affording
invariable standards for measuring duration, distance, magnitude,
and velocity. The mean sidereal day measured by the time
elapsed between two consecutive transits of any star at the same
meridian (N. 148), and the mean sidereal year which is the time
included between two consecutive returns of the sun to the same
star, are immutable units with which all great periods of time
are compared; the oscillations of the isochronous pendulum
measure its smaller portions. By these invariable standards
alone we can judge of the slow changes that other elements of
the system may have undergone. Apparent sidereal time, which
is measured by the transit of the equinoctial point at the meridian
of any place, is a variable quantity, from the effects of precession
and nutation. Clocks showing apparent sidereal time are
employed for observation, and are so regulated that they indicate
0h 0m 0s at the instant the equinoctial point passes the meridian
of the observatory. And as time is a measure of angular motion,
the clock gives the distances of the heavenly bodies from the
equinox by observing the instant at which each passes the meridian,
and converting the interval into arcs at the rate of 15° to
an hour.
The returns of the sun to the meridian and to the same equinox
or solstice have been universally adopted as the measure of our
civil days and years. The solar or astronomical day is the time
that elapses between two consecutive noons or midnights. It is
consequently longer than the sidereal day, on account of the
proper motion of the sun during a revolution of the celestial
84sphere. But, as the sun moves with greater rapidity at the
winter than at the summer solstice, the astronomical day is more
nearly equal to the sidereal day in summer than in winter. The
obliquity of the ecliptic also affects its duration; for near the
equinoxes the arc of the equator is less than the corresponding
arc of the ecliptic, and in the solstices it is greater (N. 149).
The astronomical day is therefore diminished in the first case,
and increased in the second. If the sun moved uniformly in
the equator at the rate of 59ʹ 8ʺ·33 every day, the solar days
would be all equal. The time therefore which is reckoned by
the arrival of an imaginary sun at the meridian, or of one which
is supposed to move uniformly in the equator, is denominated
mean solar time, and is given by clocks and watches in
common life. When it is reckoned by the arrival of the real
sun at the meridian, it is true or apparent time, and is given
by dials. The difference between the time shown by a clock and
a dial is the equation of time given in the Nautical Almanac,
sometimes amounting to as much as sixteen minutes. The
apparent and mean time coincide four times in the year; when
the sun’s daily motion in right ascension is equal to 59ʹ 8ʺ·33 in
a mean solar day, which happens about the 16th of April, the
16th of June, the 1st of September, and the 25th of December.
The astronomical day begins at noon, but in common reckoning
the day begins at midnight. In England it is divided into
twenty-four hours, which are counted by twelve and twelve;
but in France astronomers, adopting the decimal division, divide
the day into ten hours, the hour into one hundred minutes, and
the minute into a hundred seconds, because of the facility in
computation, and in conformity with their decimal system of
weights and measures. This subdivision is not now used in
common life, nor has it been adopted in any other country; and
although some scientific writers in France still employ that
division of time, the custom is beginning to wear out. At one
period during the French Revolution, the clock in the gardens
of the Tuileries was regulated to show decimal time. The mean
length of the day, though accurately determined, is not sufficient
for the purposes either of astronomy or civil life. The tropical
or civil year of 365d 5h 48m 49s·7, which is the time elapsed
between the consecutive returns of the sun to the mean equinoxes
or solstices, including all the changes of the seasons, is a natural
85cycle peculiarly suited for a measure of duration. It is estimated
from the winter solstice, the middle of the long annual night
under the north pole. But although the length of the civil year
is pointed out by nature as a measure of long periods, the incommensurability
that exists between the length of the day and the
revolution of the sun renders it difficult to adjust the estimation
of both in whole numbers. If the revolution of the sun were
accomplished in 365 days, all the years would be of precisely
the same number of days, and would begin and end with the
sun at the same point of the ecliptic. But as the sun’s revolution
includes the fraction of a day, a civil year and a revolution of
the sun have not the same duration. Since the fraction is nearly
the fourth of a day, in four years it is nearly equal to a revolution
of the sun, so that the addition of a supernumerary day every
fourth year nearly compensates the difference. But in process
of time further correction will be necessary, because the fraction
is less than the fourth of a day. In fact, if a bissextile be suppressed
at the end of three out of four centuries, the year so
determined will only exceed the true year by an extremely small
fraction of a day; and if in addition to this a bissextile be suppressed
every 4000 years, the length of the year will be nearly
equal to that given by observation. Were the fraction neglected,
the beginning of the year would precede that of the tropical year,
so that it would retrograde through the different seasons in a
period of about 1507 years. The Egyptian year began with the
heliacal rising of Sirius (N. 150), and contained only 365 days, by
which they lost one year in every 1461 years, their Sothaic period,
or that cycle in which the heliacal rising of Sirius passes through
the whole year and takes place again on the same day. The
division of the year into months is very old and almost universal.
But the period of seven days, by far the most permanent division
of time, and the most ancient monument of astronomical
knowledge, was used by the Brahmins in India with the same
denominations employed by us, and was alike found in the
calendars of the Jews, Egyptians, Arabs, and Assyrians. It has
survived the fall of empires, and has existed among all successive
generations, a proof of their common origin.
The day of the new moon immediately following the winter
solstice in the 707th year of Rome was made the 1st of January
of the first year of Julius Cæsar. The 25th of December of his
86forty-fifth year is considered as the date of Christ’s nativity;
and the forty-sixth year of the Julian Calendar is assumed to be
the first of our era. The preceding year is called the first year
before Christ by chronologists, but by astronomers it is called
the year 0. The astronomical year begins on the 31st of December
at noon; and the date of an observation expresses the
days and hours which have actually elapsed since that time.
Since solar and sidereal time are estimated from the passage of
the sun and the equinoctial point across the meridian of each
place, the hours are different at different places: while it is one
o’clock at one place, it is two at another, three at another, &c.;
for it is obvious that it is noon at one part of the globe at the
same moment that it is midnight at another diametrically opposite
to it: consequently an event which happens at one and the
same instant of absolute time is recorded at different places as
having happened at different times. Therefore, when observations
made at different places are to be compared, they must be
reduced by computation to what they would have been had they
been made under the same meridian. To obviate this it was
proposed by Sir John Herschel to employ mean equinoctial time,
which is the same for all the world, and independent alike of
local circumstances and inequalities in the sun’s motion. It is
the time elapsed from the instant the mean sun enters the mean
vernal equinox, and is reckoned in mean solar days and parts of
a day.
Some remarkable astronomical eras are determined by the
position of the major axis of the solar ellipse, which depends
upon the direct motion of the perigee (N. 102) and the precession
of the equinoxes conjointly, the annual motion of the one
being 11ʺ·8, and that of the other 50ʺ·1. Hence the axis,
moving at the rate of 61ʺ·9 annually, accomplishes a tropical
revolution in 209·84 years. It coincided with the line of the
equinoxes 4000 or 4089 years before the Christian era, much
about the time chronologists assign for the creation of man. In
6483 the major axis will again coincide with the line of the
equinoxes; but then the solar perigee will coincide with the
equinox of autumn, whereas at the creation of man it coincided
with the vernal equinox. In the year 1246 the major axis was
perpendicular to the line of the equinoxes; then the solar perigee
coincided with the solstice of summer, and the apogee with the
87solstice of winter. According to La Place, who computed these
periods from different data, the last coincidence happened in the
year 1250 of our era, which induced him to propose that year as
a universal epoch, the vernal equinox of the year 1250 to be the
first day of the first year. These eras can only be regarded as
approximate, since ancient observations are too inaccurate, and
modern observations too recent, to afford data for their precise
determination.
The variation in the position of the solar ellipse occasions
corresponding changes in the length of the seasons. In its
present position spring is shorter than summer, and autumn
longer than winter; and while the solar perigee continues as it
now is, between the solstice of winter and the equinox of spring,
the period including spring and summer will be longer than that
including autumn and winter. In this century the difference is
between seven and eight days. The intervals will be equal
towards the year 6483, when the perigee will coincide with the
equinox of spring; but, when it passes that point, the spring and
summer taken together will be shorter than the period including
the autumn and winter (N. 151). These changes will be accomplished
in a tropical revolution of the major axis of the earth’s
orbit, which includes an interval of 20,984 years. Were the
orbit circular, the seasons would be equal; their difference arises
from the excentricity of the orbit, small as it is; but the changes
are so trifling as to be imperceptible in the short span of human
life.
No circumstance in the whole science of astronomy excites a
deeper interest than its application to chronology. “Whole
nations,” says La Place, “have been swept from the earth, with
their languages, arts, and sciences, leaving but confused masses
of ruins to mark the place where mighty cities stood; their history,
with the exception of a few doubtful traditions, has perished;
but the perfection of their astronomical observations marks their
high antiquity, fixes the periods of their existence, and proves
that, even at that early time, they must have made considerable
progress in science.” The ancient state of the heavens may now
be computed with great accuracy; and, by comparing the results
of calculation with ancient observations, the exact period at
which they were made may be verified if true, or, if false, their
error may be detected. If the date be accurate and the observation
88good, it will verify the accuracy of modern tables, and will
show to how many centuries they may be extended without the
fear of error. A few examples will show the importance of the
subject.
At the solstices the sun is at his greatest distance from the
equator; consequently his declination at these times is equal to
the obliquity of the ecliptic (N. 152), which was formerly determined
from the meridian length of the shadow of the stile of a
dial on the day of a solstice. The lengths of the meridian shadow
at the summer and winter solstices are recorded to have been
observed at the city of Layang, in China, 1100 years before the
Christian era. From these the distances of the sun from the
zenith (N. 153) of the city of Layang are known. Half the sum
of these zenith distances determines the latitude, and half their
difference gives the obliquity of the ecliptic at the period of the
observation; and, as the law of the variation of the obliquity is
known, both the time and place of the observations have been
verified by computations from modern tables. Thus the Chinese
had made some advances in the science of astronomy at that
early period. Their whole chronology is founded on the observations
of eclipses, which prove the existence of that empire for
more than 4700 years. The epoch of the lunar tables of the
Indians, supposed by Bailly to be 3000 years before the Christian
era, was proved by La Place, from the acceleration of the
moon, not to be more ancient than the time of Ptolemy, who
lived in the second century after it. The great inequality of
Jupiter and Saturn, whose cycle embraces 918 years, is peculiarly
fitted for marking the civilization of a people. The Indians had
determined the mean motions of these two planets in that part of
their periods when the apparent mean motion of Saturn was at
the slowest, and that of Jupiter the most rapid. The periods in
which that happened were 3102 years before the Christian era,
and the year 1491 after it. The returns of comets to their
perihelia may possibly mark the present state of astronomy to
future ages.
The places of the fixed stars are affected by the precession of
the equinoxes; and, as the law of that variation is known, their
positions at any time may be computed. Now Eudoxus, a contemporary
of Plato, mentions a star situate in the pole of the
equator, and it appears from computation that χ Draconis was
89not very far from that place about 3000 years ago; but, as it is
only about 2150 years since Eudoxus lived, he must have
described an anterior state of the heavens, supposed to be the
same that was mentioned by Chiron about the time of the siege
of Troy. Thus every circumstance concurs in showing that
astronomy was cultivated in the highest ages of antiquity.
It is possible that a knowledge of astronomy may lead to the
interpretation of hieroglyphical characters. Astronomical signs
are often found on the ancient Egyptian monuments, probably
employed by the priests to record dates. The author had
occasion to witness an instance of this most interesting application
of astronomy, in ascertaining the date of a papyrus, sent
from Egypt by Mr. Salt, in the hieroglyphical researches of the
late Dr. Thomas Young, whose profound and varied acquirements
do honour to his country, and to the age in which he lived. The
manuscript was found in a mummy case; it proved to be a
horoscope of the age of Ptolemy, and its date was determined
from the configuration of the heavens at the time of its construction.
The form of the earth furnishes a standard of weights and
measures for the ordinary purposes of life, as well as for the
determination of the masses and distances of the heavenly bodies.
The length of the pendulum vibrating seconds of mean solar
time, in the latitude of London, forms the standard of the
British measure of extension. Its approximate length oscillating
in vacuo at the temperature of 62° of Fahrenheit, and reduced to
the level of the sea (N. 154), was determined by Captain Kater
to be 39·1393 inches. The weight of a cubic inch of water at
the temperature of 62° of Fahrenheit, barometer 30 inches, was
also determined in parts of the imperial troy pound, whence a
standard both of weight and capacity was deduced. The French
have adopted the mètre, equal to 3·2808992 English feet, for their
unit of linear measure, which is the ten-millionth part of the
arc of the meridian which extends from the equator to the pole,
as deduced from the measures of the separate arc extending from
Formentera, the most southern of the Balearic Islands, to Dunkirk.
Should the national standards of the two countries ever
be lost, both may be recovered, since they are derived from
natural and invariable ones. The length of the measure deduced
from that of the pendulum would be found again with more
90facility than the mètre. But, as no measure is mathematically
exact, an error in the original standard may at length become
sensible in measuring a great extent, whereas the error that
must necessarily arise in measuring the quadrant of the meridian
(N. 155) is rendered totally insensible by subdivision in taking its
ten-millionth part. The French have adopted the decimal division,
not only in time, but also in their degrees, weights, and
measures, on account of the very great facility it affords in computation.
It has not been adopted by any other country, though
nothing is more desirable than that all nations should concur
in using the same standards, not only on account of convenience,
but as affording a more definite idea of quantity. It is singular
that the decimal division of the day, of space, weights, and
measures, was employed in China 4000 years ago; and that at
the time Ibn Junis made his observations at Cairo, about the
year 1000 of the Christian era, the Arabs were in the habit of
employing the vibrations of the pendulum in their astronomical
observations as a measure of time.</div></body></text></TEI>