<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="18">
140
SECTION XVII.

Vibration of Musical Strings—Harmonic Sounds—Nodes—Vibration of
Air in Wind-Instruments—Vibration of Solids—Vibrating Plates—Bells—Harmony—Sounding
Boards—Forced Vibrations—Resonance—Speaking Machines.
When the particles of elastic bodies are suddenly disturbed by
an impulse, they return to their natural position by a series of
isochronous vibrations, whose rapidity, force, and permanency
depend upon the elasticity, the form, and the mode of aggregation
which unites the particles of the body. These oscillations
are communicated to the air, and on account of its elasticity they
excite alternate condensations and dilatations in the strata of the
fluid nearest to the vibrating body; from thence they are propagated
to a distance. A string or wire stretched between two
pins, when drawn aside and suddenly let go, will vibrate till its
own rigidity and the resistance of the air reduce it to rest. These
oscillations may be rotatory, in every plane, or confined to one
plane according as the motion is communicated. In the piano-forte,
where the strings are struck by a hammer at one extremity,
the vibrations probably consist of a bulge running to and fro
from end to end. Different modes of vibration may be obtained
from the same sonorous body. Suppose a vibrating string to
give the lowest C of the pianoforte which is the fundamental
note of the string; if it be lightly touched exactly in the middle,
so as to retain that point at rest, each half will then vibrate twice
as fast as the whole, but in opposite directions; the ventral or
bulging segments will be alternately above and below the natural
position of the string, and the resulting note will be the octave
above C. When a point at a third of the length of the string is
kept at rest, the vibrations will be three times as fast as those of
the whole string, and will give the twelfth above C. When the
point of rest is one-fourth of the whole, the oscillations will be
four times as fast as those of the fundamental note, and will give
the double octave; and so on. These acute sounds are called
141the harmonics of the fundamental note. It is clear, from what
has been stated, that the string thus vibrating could not give
these harmonics spontaneously unless it divided itself at its
aliquot parts into two, three, four, or more segments in opposite
states of vibration separated by points actually at rest. In proof
of this, pieces of paper placed on the string at the half, third,
fourth, or other aliquot points, according to the corresponding
harmonic sound, will remain on it during its vibration, but will
instantly fly off from any of the intermediate points. The points
of rest, called the nodal points of the string, are a mere consequence
of the law of interferences; for, if a rope fastened at one
end be moved to and fro at the other extremity so as to transmit
a succession of equal waves along it, they will be successively
reflected when they arrive at the other end of the rope by the
fixed point, and in returning they will occasionally interfere with
the advancing waves; and, as these opposite undulations will at
certain points destroy one another, the point of the rope in which
this happens will remain at rest. Thus a series of nodes and
ventral segments will be produced whose number will depend
upon the tension and the frequency of the alternate motions communicated
to the moveable end. So, when a string fixed at
both ends is put in motion by a sudden blow at any point of it,
the primitive impulse divides itself into two pulses running
opposite ways, which are each totally reflected at the extremities,
and, running back again along the whole length, are again reflected
at the other ends. And thus they will continue to run
backwards and forwards, crossing one another at each traverse,
and occasionally interfering, so as to produce nodes; so that the
motion of a string fastened at both ends consists of a wave or
pulse continually doubled back on itself by reflection at the fixed
extremities.
Harmonics generally co-exist with the fundamental sound in
the same vibrating body. If one of the lowest strings of the
pianoforte be struck, an attentive ear will not only hear the
fundamental note, but will detect all the others sounding along
with it, though with less and less intensity as their pitch becomes
higher. According to the law of co-existing undulations, the
whole string and each of its aliquot parts are in different and
independent states of vibration at the same time; and as all the
resulting notes are heard simultaneously, not only the air, but
142the ear also, vibrates in unison with each at the same instant
(N. 181).
Harmony consists in an agreeable combination of sounds.
When two chords perform their vibrations in the same time,
they are in unison; but, when their vibrations are so related as
to have a common period, after a few oscillations they produce
concord. Thus, when the vibrations of two strings bear a very
simple relation to each other, as where one of them makes two,
three, four, &c., vibrations in the time the other makes one; or,
if it accomplishes three, four, &c., vibrations while the other
makes two, the result is a concord which is the more perfect the
shorter the common period. In discords, on the contrary, the
beats are distinctly audible, which produces a disagreeable and
harsh effect, because the vibrations do not bear a simple relation
to one another, as where one of two strings makes eight vibrations
while the other accomplishes fifteen. The pleasure afforded
by harmony is attributed by Dr. Young to the love of order, and
to a predilection for a regular repetition of sensations natural to
the human mind, which is gratified by the perfect regularity
and rapid recurrence of the vibrations. The love of poetry and
dancing he conceives to arise in some degree from the rhythm of
the one and the regularity of the motions in the other.
A blast of air passing over the open end of a tube, as over the
reeds in Pan’s pipes; over a hole in one side, as in the flute; or
through the aperture called a reed, with a flexible tongue, as in
the clarinet, puts the internal column of air into longitudinal
vibrations by the alternate condensations and rarefactions of its
particles. At the same time the column spontaneously divides
itself into nodes, between which the air also vibrates longitudinally,
but with a rapidity inversely proportional to the length of
the divisions, giving the fundamental note or one of its harmonics.
The nodes are produced on the principle of interferences
by the reflection of the longitudinal undulations of the air at the
ends of the pipe, as in the musical string, only that in one case
the undulations are longitudinal, and in the other transverse.
A pipe, either open or shut at both ends, when sounded,
vibrates entire, or divides itself spontaneously into two, three,
four, &c., segments separated by nodes. The whole column
gives the fundamental note by waves or vibrations of the same
length with the pipe. The first harmonic is produced by waves
143half as long as the tube, the second harmonic by waves a third
as long, and so on. The harmonic segments in an open and
shut pipe are the same in number, but differently placed. In a
shut pipe the two ends are nodes, but in an open pipe there is
half a segment at each extremity, because the air at these points
is neither rarefied nor condensed, being in contact with that
which is external. If one of the ends of the open pipe be closed,
its fundamental note will be an octave lower: the air will now
divide itself into three, five, seven, &c., segments; and the wave
producing its fundamental note will be twice as long as the pipe,
so that it will be doubled back (N. 182). All these notes may
be produced separately by varying the intensity of the blast.
Blowing steadily and gently, the fundamental note will sound;
when the force of the blast is increased the note will all at once
start up an octave; when the intensity of the wind is augmented
the twelfth will be heard; and, by continuing to increase the
force of the blast, the other harmonics may be obtained, but no
force of wind will produce a note intermediate between these.
The harmonics of a flute may be obtained in this manner, from
the lowest C or D upwards, without altering the fingering,
merely by increasing the intensity of the blast and altering the
form of the lips. Pipes of the same dimensions, whether of lead,
glass, or wood, give the same tone as to pitch under the same
circumstances, which shows that the air alone produces the
sound.
Metal springs fastened at one end, when forcibly bent, endeavour
to return to rest by a series of vibrations, which give very
pleasing tones, as in musical boxes. Various musical instruments
have been constructed, consisting of metallic springs thrown
into vibration by a current of air. Among the most perfect of
these are Mr. Wheatstone’s Symphonion, Concertina, and Æolian
Organ, instruments of different effects and capabilities, but all
possessing considerable execution and expression.
The Syren is an ingenious instrument, devised by M. Cagniard
de la Tour, for ascertaining the number of pulsations in a second,
corresponding to each pitch: the notes are produced by jets of
air passing through small apertures, arranged at regular distances
in a circle on the side of a box, before which a disc revolves
pierced with the same number of holes. During a revolution of
the disc the currents are alternately intercepted and allowed to
144pass as many times as there are apertures in it, and a sound is
produced whose pitch depends on the velocity of rotation.
A glass or metallic rod, when struck at one end, or rubbed in
the direction of its length with a wet finger, vibrates longitudinally,
like a column of air, by the alternate condensation and
expansion of its constituent particles, producing a clear and
beautiful musical note of a high pitch, on account of the rapidity
with which these substances transmit sound. Rods, surfaces,
and, in general, all undulating bodies, resolve themselves into
nodes. But in surfaces the parts which remain at rest during
their vibrations are lines which are curved or plane according to
the substance, its form, and the mode of vibration. If a little
fine dry sand be strewed over the surface of a plate of glass or
metal, and if undulations be excited by drawing the bow of a
violin across its edge, it will emit a musical sound, and the sand
will immediately arrange itself in the nodal lines, where alone it
will accumulate and remain at rest, because the segments of the
surface on each side will be in different states of vibration, the
one being elevated while the other is depressed; and, as these
two motions meet in the nodal lines, they neutralise one another.
These lines vary in form and position with the part where the
bow is drawn across, and the point by which the plate is held.
The motion of the sand shows in what direction the vibrations
take place. If they be perpendicular to the surface, the sand
will be violently tossed up and down till it finds the points of
rest. If they be tangential, the sand will only creep along the
surface to the nodal lines. Sometimes the undulations are
oblique, or compounded of both the preceding. If a bow be
drawn across one of the angles of a square plate of glass or metal
held firmly by the centre, the sand will arrange itself in two
straight lines parallel to the sides of the plate, and crossing in
the centre so as to divide it into four equal squares, whose
motions will be contrary to each other. Two of the diagonal
squares will make their excursions on one side of the plate, while
the other two make their vibrations on the other side of it. This
mode of vibration produces the lowest tone of the plate (N. 183).
If the plate be still held by the centre, and the bow applied to
the middle of one of the sides, the vibrations will be more rapid,
and the tone will be a fifth higher than in the preceding case:
now the sand will arrange itself from corner to corner, and will
145divide the plate into four equal triangles, each pair of which will
make their excursions on opposite sides of the plate. The nodal
lines and pitch vary not only with the point where the bow is
applied, but with the point by which the plate is held, which
being at rest necessarily determines the direction of one of the
quiescent lines. The forms assumed by the sand in square
plates are very numerous, corresponding to all the various modes
of vibration. The lines in circular plates are even more remarkable
for their symmetry, and upon them the forms assumed by
the sand may be classed in three systems. The first is the diametrical
system, in which the figures consist of diameters dividing
the circumference of the plate into equal parts, each of which is
in a different state of vibration from those adjacent. Two diameters,
for example, crossing at right angles, divide the circumference
into four equal parts; three diameters divide it into six
equal parts; four divide it into eight, and so on. In a metallic
plate, these divisions may amount to thirty-six or forty. The
next is the concentric system, where the sand arranges itself in
circles, having the same centre with the plate; and the third is
the compound system, where the figures assumed by the sand
are compounded of the other two, producing very complicated
and beautiful forms. Galileo seems to have been the first to
notice the points of rest and motion in the sounding-board of a
musical instrument; but to Chladni is due the whole discovery
of the symmetrical forms of the nodal lines in vibrating plates
(N. 184). Professor Wheatstone has shown, in a paper read
before the Royal Society in 1833, that all Chladni’s figures, and
indeed all the nodal figures of vibrating surfaces, result from
very simple modes of vibration oscillating isochronously, and
superposed upon each other; the resulting figure varying with
the component modes of vibration, the number of the superpositions,
and the angles at which they are superposed. For
example, if a square plate be vibrating so as to make the sand
arrange itself in straight lines parallel to one side of the plate,
and if, in addition to this, such vibrations be excited as would
have caused the sand to form in lines perpendicular to the first
had the plate been at rest, the combined vibrations will make
the sand form in lines from corner to corner (N. 185).
M. Savart’s experiments on the vibrations of flat glass rulers
are highly interesting. Let a lamina of glass 27in·56 long, 0·59
146of an inch broad, and 0·06 of an inch in thickness, be held by
the edges in the middle, with its flat surface horizontal. If this
surface be strewed with sand, and set in longitudinal vibration
by rubbing its under surface with a wet cloth, the sand on the
upper surface will arrange itself in lines parallel to the ends of
the lamina, always in one or other of two systems (N. 186).
Although the same one of the two systems will always be produced
by the same plate of glass, yet among different plates of
the preceding dimensions, even though cut from the same sheet
side by side, one will invariably exhibit one system, and the
other the other, without any visible reason for the difference.
Now, if the positions of these quiescent lines be marked on the
upper surface, and if the plate be turned so that the lower surface
becomes the upper one, the sand being strewed, and vibrations
excited as before, the nodal lines will still be parallel to the ends
of the lamina, but their positions will be intermediate between
those of the upper surface (N. 187). Thus it appears that all
the motions of one half of the thickness of the lamina, or ruler,
are exactly contrary to those of the corresponding points of the
other half. If the thickness of the lamina be increased, the
other dimensions remaining the same, the sound will not vary,
but the number of nodal lines will be less. When the breadth
of the lamina exceeds the 0·6 of an inch, the nodal lines become
curved, and are different on the two surfaces. A great variety
of forms are produced by increasing the breadth and changing
the form of the surface; but in all it appears that the motions
in one half of the thickness are opposed to those in the other
half.
M. Savart also found, by placing small paper rings round a
cylindrical tube or rod, so as to rest upon it at one point only,
that, when the tube or rod is continually turned on its axis in
the same direction, the rings slide along during the vibrations,
till they come to a quiescent point, where they rest. By tracing
these nodal lines he discovered that they twist in a spiral or
corkscrew round rods and cylinders, making one or more turns
according to the length; but at certain points, varying in number
according to the mode of vibration of the rod, the screw stops,
and recommences on the other side, though it is turned in a
contrary direction; that is, on one side it is a right-handed
screw, on the other a left (N. 188). The nodal lines in the
147interior surface of the tube are perfectly similar to those in the
exterior, but they occupy intermediate positions. If a small
ivory ball be put within the tube, it will follow these nodal lines
when the tube is made to revolve on its axis.
All solids which ring when struck, such as bells, drinking
glasses, gongs, &c., have their shape momentarily and forcibly
changed by the blow, and from their elasticity, or tendency to
resume their natural form, a series of undulations take place,
owing to the alternate condensations and rarefactions of the
particles of solid matter. These have also their harmonic tones,
and consequently nodes. Indeed, generally, when a rigid system
of any form whatever vibrates either transversely or longitudinally,
it divides itself into a certain number of parts which perform
their vibrations without disturbing one another. These
parts are at every instant in alternate states of undulation; and,
as the points or lines where they join partake of both, they
remain at rest, because the opposing motions destroy one
another.
The air, notwithstanding its rarity, is capable of transmitting
its undulations when in contact with a body susceptible of
admitting and exciting them. It is thus that sympathetic undulations
are excited by a body vibrating near insulated tended
strings, capable of following its undulations, either by vibrating
entire, or by separating themselves into their harmonic divisions.
If two chords equally stretched, of which one is twice or
three times longer than the other, be placed side by side, and if
the shorter be sounded, its vibrations will be communicated by
the air to the other, which will be thrown into such a state of
vibration that it will be spontaneously divided into segments
equal in length to the shorter string. When a tuning-fork
receives a blow and is made to rest upon a piano-forte during its
vibration, every string which, either by its natural length or by
its spontaneous subdivisions, is capable of executing corresponding
vibrations, responds in a sympathetic note. The same effect
will be produced by the stroke of a bell near a piano or harp.
Some one or other of the notes of an organ are generally in
unison with one of the panes or with the whole sash of a window,
which consequently resounds when those notes are sounded. A
peal of thunder has frequently the same effect. The sound of
very large organ-pipes is generally inaudible till the air be set in
148motion by the undulations of some of the superior accords, and
then the sound becomes extremely energetic. Recurring vibrations
occasionally influence each other’s periods. For example,
two adjacent organ-pipes nearly in unison may force themselves
into concord; and two clocks, whose rates differed considerably
when separate, have been known to beat together when fixed to
the same wall, and one clock has forced the pendulum of another
into motion, when merely standing on the same stone pavement.
These forced oscillations, which correspond in their periods with
those of the exciting cause, are to be traced in every department
of physical science. Several instances of them have already
occurred in this work. Such are the tides, which follow the
sun and moon in all their motions and periods. The nutation
of the earth’s axis also, which corresponds with the period, and
represents the motion of the nodes of the moon, is again reflected
back to the moon, and may be traced in the nutation of
the lunar orbit. And, lastly, the acceleration of the moon’s
mean motion represents the action of the planets on the earth
reflected by the sun to the moon.
In consequence of the facility with which the air communicates
undulations, all the phenomena of vibrating plates may be exhibited
by sand strewed on paper or parchment, stretched over
a harmonica glass or large bell-shaped tumbler. In order to
give due tension to the paper or vellum, it must be wetted,
stretched over the glass, gummed round the edges, allowed to
dry, and varnished over, to prevent changes in its tension from
the humidity of the atmosphere. If a circular disc of glass be
held concentrically over this apparatus, with its plane parallel to
the surface of the paper, and set in vibration by drawing a bow
across its edge, so as to make sand on its surface take any of
Chladni’s figures, the sand on the paper will assume the very
same form, in consequence of the vibrations of the disc being
communicated to the paper by the air. When the disc is removed
slowly in a horizontal direction, the forms on the paper
will correspond with those on the disc, till the distance is too
great for the air to convey the vibrations. If the disc while
vibrating be gradually more and more inclined to the horizon,
the figures on the paper will vary by degrees; and, when the
vibrating disc is perpendicular to the horizon, the sand on the
paper will form into straight lines parallel to the surface of the
149disc, by creeping along it instead of dancing up and down. If
the disc be made to turn round its vertical diameter while vibrating,
the nodal lines on the paper will revolve, and exactly follow
the motion of the disc. It appears, from this experiment, that
the motions of the aërial molecules in every part of a spherical
wave, propagated from a vibrating body as a centre, are parallel
to each other, and not divergent like the radii of a circle. When
a slow air is played on a flute near this apparatus, each note calls
up a particular form in the sand, which the next note effaces, to
establish its own. The motion of the sand will even detect
sounds that are inaudible. By the vibrations of sand on a drum-head
the besieged have discovered the direction in which a
counter-mine was working. M. Savart, who made these beautiful
experiments, employed this apparatus to discover nodal lines
in masses of air. He found that the air of a room, when thrown
into undulations by the continued sound of an organ-pipe, or by
any other means, divides itself into masses separated by nodal
curves of double curvature, such as spirals, on each side of
which the air is in opposite states of vibration. He even traced
these quiescent lines going out at an open window, and for a
considerable distance in the open air. The sand is violently
agitated where the undulations of the air are greatest, and remains
at rest in the nodal lines. M. Savart observed, that when
he moved his head away from a quiescent line towards the right
the sound appeared to come from the right, and when he moved
it towards the left the sound seemed to come from the left,
because the molecules of air are in different states of motion
on each side of the quiescent line.
A musical string gives a very feeble sound when vibrating
alone, on account of the small quantity of air set in motion;
but when attached to a sounding-board, as in the harp and piano-forte,
it communicates its undulations to that surface, and from
thence to every part of the instrument; so that the whole system
vibrates isochronously, and by exposing an extensive undulating
surface, which transmits its undulations to a great mass of air,
the sound is much reinforced. The intensity is greatest when
the vibrations of the string or sounding body are perpendicular
to the sounding-board, and least when they are in the same
plane with it. The sounding-board of the piano-forte is better
disposed than that of any other stringed instrument, because the
150hammers strike the strings so as to make them vibrate at right
angles to it. In the guitar, on the contrary, they are struck
obliquely, which renders the tone feeble, unless when the sides,
which also act as a sounding-board, are deep. It is evident that
the sounding-board and the whole instrument are agitated at once
by all the superposed vibrations excited by the simultaneous or
consecutive notes that are sounded, each having its perfect effect
independently of the rest. A sounding-board not only reciprocates
the different degrees of pitch, but all the nameless qualities
of tone. This has been beautifully illustrated by Professor
Wheatstone in a series of experiments on the transmission
through solid conductors of musical performances, from the
harp, piano, violin, clarinet, &c. He found that all the varieties
of pitch, quality, and intensity are perfectly transmitted with
their relative gradations, and may be communicated, through
conducting wires or rods of very considerable length, to a properly
disposed sounding-board in a distant apartment. The
sounds of an entire orchestra may be transmitted and reciprocated
by connecting one end of a metallic rod with a sounding-board
near the orchestra, so placed as to resound to all the instruments,
and the other end with the sounding-board of a harp, piano, or
guitar, in a remote apartment. Professor Wheatstone observes,
“The effect of this experiment is very pleasing; the sounds,
indeed, have so little intensity as scarcely to be heard at a distance
from the reciprocating instrument; but, on placing the ear
close to it, a diminutive band is heard in which all the instruments
preserve their distinctive qualities, and the pianos and
fortes, the crescendos and diminuendos, their relative contrasts.
Compared with an ordinary band heard at a distance through
the air, the effect is as a landscape seen in miniature beauty
through a concave lens, compared with the same scene viewed
by ordinary vision through a murky atmosphere.”
Every one is aware of the reinforcement of sound by the
resonance of cavities. When singing or speaking near the aperture
of a wide-mouthed vessel, the intensity of some one note in
unison with the air in the cavity is often augmented to a great
degree. Any vessel will resound if a body vibrating the natural
note of the cavity be placed opposite to its orifice, and be large
enough to cover it, or at least to set a large portion of the
adjacent air in motion. For the sound will be alternately reflected
151by the bottom of the cavity and the undulating body at
its mouth. The first impulse of the undulating substance will
be reflected by the bottom of the cavity, and then by the undulating
body, in time to combine with the second new impulse.
This reinforced sound will also be twice reflected in time to conspire
with the third new impulse; and, as the same process will
be repeated on every new impulse, each will combine with all
its echoes to reinforce the sound prodigiously. Professor Wheatstone,
to whose ingenuity we are indebted for so much new and
valuable information on the theory of sound, has given some
very striking instances of resonance. If one of the branches of
a vibrating tuning-fork be brought near the embouchure of a
flute, the lateral apertures of which are stopped so as to render
it capable of producing the same sound as the fork, the feeble
and scarcely audible sound of the fork will be augmented by the
rich resonance of the column of air within the flute, and the tone
will be full and clear. The sound will be found greatly to
decrease by closing or opening another aperture; for the alteration
in the length of the column of air renders it no longer fit
perfectly to reciprocate the sound of the fork. This experiment
may be made on a concert flute with a C tuning-fork. But
Professor Wheatstone observes, that in this case it is generally
necessary to finger the flute for B, because, when blown into
with the mouth, the under-lip partly covers the embouchure,
which renders the sound about a semitone flatter than it would
be were the embouchure entirely uncovered. He has also shown,
by the following experiment, that any one among several simultaneous
sounds may be rendered separately audible. If two
bottles be selected, and tuned by filling them with such a quantity
of water as will render them unisonant with two tuning-forks
which differ in pitch, on bringing both of the vibrating tuning-forks
to the mouth of each bottle alternately, in each case that
sound only will be heard which is reciprocated by the unisonant
bottle.
Several attempts have been made to imitate the articulation
of the letters of the alphabet. About the year 1779, MM. Kratzenstein
of St. Petersburg, and Kempelen of Vienna, constructed
instruments which articulated many letters, words, and even
sentences. Mr. Willis of Cambridge has adapted cylindrical
tubes to a reed, whose length can be varied at pleasure by sliding
152joints. Upon drawing out a tube while a column of air from the
bellows of an organ is passing through it, the vowels are pronounced
in the order, i, e, a, o, u. On extending the tube, they
are repeated after a certain interval, in the inverted order,
u, o, a, e, i. After another interval they are again obtained in
the direct order, and so on. When the pitch of the reed is very
high, it is impossible to sound some of the vowels, which is in
perfect correspondence with the human voice, female singers
being unable to pronounce u and o in their high notes. From
the singular discoveries of M. Savart on the nature of the
human voice, and the investigations of Mr. Willis on the mechanism
of the larynx, it may be presumed that ultimately the
utterance or pronunciation of modern languages will be conveyed,
not only to the eye, but also to the ear of posterity. Had the
ancients possessed the means of transmitting such definite sounds,
the civilised world would still have responded in sympathetic
notes at the distance of many ages.</div></body></text></TEI>