<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="20">
159
SECTION XIX.

Constitution of Light according to Sir Isaac Newton—Absorption of Light—Colours
of Bodies—Constitution of Light according to Sir David
Brewster—New Colours—Fraunhofer’s Dark Lines—Dispersion of
Light—The Achromatic Telescope—Homogeneous Light—Accidental
and Complementary Colours—M. Plateau’s Experiments and Theory
of Accidental Colours.
It is impossible thus to trace the path of a sunbeam through our
atmosphere without feeling a desire to know its nature, by what
power it traverses the immensity of space, and the various modifications
it undergoes at the surfaces and in the interior of terrestrial
substances.
Sir Isaac Newton proved the compound nature of white light,
as emitted from the sun, by passing a sunbeam through a glass
prism (N. 195), which, separating the rays by refraction, formed
a spectrum or oblong image of the sun, consisting of seven colours,
red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet—of which the
red is the least refrangible, and the violet the most. But, when
he reunited these seven rays by means of a lens, the compound
beam became pure white as before. He insulated each coloured
ray, and, finding that it was no longer capable of decomposition
by refraction, concluded that white light consists of seven kinds
of homogeneous light, and that to the same colour the same refrangibility
ever belongs, and to the same refrangibility the same
colour. Since the discovery of absorbent media, however, it
appears that this is not the constitution of the solar spectrum.
We know of no substance that is either perfectly opaque or
perfectly transparent. Even gold may be beaten so thin as to be
pervious to light. On the contrary, the clearest crystal, the
purest air or water, stops or absorbs its rays when transmitted,
and gradually extinguishes them as they penetrate to greater
depths. On this account objects cannot be seen at the bottom of
very deep water, and many more stars are visible to the naked
eye from the tops of mountains than from the valleys. The
quantity of light that is incident on any transparent substance is
160always greater than the sum of the reflected and refracted rays.
A small quantity is irregularly reflected in all directions by the
imperfections of the polish by which we are enabled to see the
surface; but a much greater portion is absorbed by the body.
Bodies that reflect all the rays appear white, those that absorb
them all seem black; but most substances, after decomposing the
white light which falls upon them, reflect some colours and
absorb the rest. A violet reflects the violet rays alone and
absorbs the others. Scarlet cloth absorbs almost all the colours
except red. Yellow cloth reflects the yellow rays most abundantly,
and blue cloth those that are blue. Consequently colour
is not a property of matter, but arises from the action of matter
upon light. In fact, the law of action and reaction obtains in
light as in every other department of nature, so that light cannot
be reflected, refracted, much less absorbed, by any medium
without being reacted upon by it. Thus a white riband reflects
all the rays, but, when dyed red, the particles of the silk acquire
the property of reflecting the red rays most abundantly and of
absorbing the others. Upon this property of unequal absorption
the colours of transparent media depend; for they also receive
their colour from their power of stopping or absorbing some of
the colours of white light, and transmitting others. As, for
example, black and red inks, though equally homogeneous, absorb
different kinds of rays; and, when exposed to the sun, they
become heated in different degrees; while pure water seems to
transmit all rays equally, and is not sensibly heated by the passing
light of the sun. The rich dark light transmitted by a smalt-blue
finger-glass is not a homogeneous colour like the blue or indigo
of the spectrum, but is a mixture of all the colours of white light
which the glass has not absorbed. The colours absorbed are such
as mixed with the blue tint would form white light. When the
spectrum of seven colours is viewed through a thin plate of this
glass, they are all visible; and, when the plate is very thick,
every colour is absorbed between the extreme red and the extreme
violet, the interval being perfectly black; but, if the spectrum be
viewed through a certain thickness of the glass intermediate
between the two, it will be found that the middle of the red
space, the whole of the orange, a great part of the green, a considerable
part of the blue, a little of the indigo, and a very little
of the violet, vanish, being absorbed by the blue glass; and that
161the yellow rays occupy a larger space, covering part of that formerly
occupied by the orange on one side and by the green on the
other: so that the blue glass absorbs the red light, which when
mixed with the yellow constitutes orange; and also absorbs the
blue light, which when mixed with the yellow forms the part of
the green space next to the yellow. Hence, by absorption, green
light is decomposed into yellow and blue, and orange light into
yellow and red: consequently the orange and green rays, though
incapable of decomposition by refraction, can be resolved by
absorption, and actually consist of two different colours possessing
the same degree of refrangibility. Difference of colour, therefore,
is not a test of difference of refrangibility, and the conclusion
deduced by Newton is no longer admissible as a general truth.
By this analysis of the spectrum, not only with blue glass but
with a variety of coloured media, Sir David Brewster, so justly
celebrated for his optical discoveries, is of opinion that the solar
spectrum consists of three primary colours, red, yellow, and blue,
each of which exists throughout its whole extent, but with different
degrees of intensity in different parts; and that the superposition
of these three produces all the seven hues according as
each primary colour is in excess or defect. That since a certain
portion of red, yellow, and blue rays constitute white light, the
colour of any point of the spectrum may be considered as consisting
of the predominating colour at that point mixed with
white light. Consequently, “by absorbing the excess of any
colour at any point of the spectrum above what is necessary to
form white light, such white light will appear at that point as
never mortal eye looked upon before this experiment, since it
possesses the remarkable property of remaining the same after
any number of refractions, and of being capable of decomposition
by absorption alone.” This analysis of light has been called in
question by Professor Challis, of Cambridge, who does not admit
of any resolution by absorbing media different from that by the
prism, though he admits that a mixture of blue and yellow solar
light produces green. Professor Stokes, on the contrary, does not
allow that a mixture of blue and yellow solar light produces
green, although that mixture produces green when the light is
from other sources, for he found the gradation from sunlight to
pass from yellow through diluted yellow, white, diluted blue to
blue; so he does not admit of Sir David Brewster’s analysis of
162the spectrum; however, there appears to be still a doubt as to
the real character of the phenomena presented by certain absorbing
substances.
In addition to the seven colours of the Newtonian spectrum,
Sir John Herschel has discovered a set of very dark red rays
beyond the red extremity of the spectrum which can only be seen
when the eye is defended from the glare of the other colours by a
dark blue cobalt glass. He has also found that beyond the
extreme violet there are visible rays of a lavender gray colour,
which may be seen by throwing the spectrum on a sheet of paper
moistened by the carbonate of soda. The illuminating power of
the different rays of the spectrum varies with the colour. The
most intense light is in the mean yellow ray, or, according to M.
Fraunhofer, at the boundary of the orange and yellow.
When the prism is very perfect and the sunbeam small, so
that the spectrum may be received on a sheet of white paper in
its utmost state of purity, it presents the appearance of a riband
shaded with all the prismatic colours, having its breadth irregularly
striped or subdivided by an indefinite number of dark, and
sometimes black lines. The greater number of these rayless lines
are so extremely narrow that it is impossible to see them in ordinary
circumstances. The best method is to receive the spectrum
on the object-glass of a telescope, so as to magnify them sufficiently
to render them visible. This experiment may also be
made, but in an imperfect manner, by viewing a narrow slit
between two nearly closed window-shutters through a very excellent
glass prism held close to the eye, with its refracting angle
parallel to the line of light. The rayless lines in the red portion
of the spectrum become most visible as the sun approaches the
horizon, while those in the blue extremity are most obvious in
the middle of the day. When the spectrum is formed by the
sun’s rays, either direct or indirect—as from the sky, clouds,
rainbow, moon, or planets—the black bands are always found to
be in the same parts of the spectrum, and under all circumstances
to maintain the same relative positions. Similar dark lines are
also seen in the light of the stars, in the electric light, and in the
flame of combustible substances, though differently arranged,
each star and each flame having a system of dark lines peculiar
to itself. Dr. Wollaston and M. Fraunhofer, of Munich, discovered
these lines deficient of rays independently of each other.
163M. Fraunhofer found that their number extends to nearly six
hundred, but they are much more numerous. There are bright
lines in the solar spectrum which also maintain a fixed position.
Among the dark lines, M. Fraunhofer selected seven of the most
remarkable, and determined their distances so accurately, that
they now form standard and invariable points of reference for
measuring the refractive powers of different media on the rays of
light, which renders this department of optics as exact as any of
the physical sciences. These lines are designated by the letters
of the alphabet, beginning with B, which is in the red near the
end of the spectrum; C is farther advanced in the red; D is in the
orange; E in the green; F in the blue; G in the indigo; and H in
the violet. By means of these fixed points, M. Fraunhofer has
ascertained from prismatic observation the refrangibility of seven
of the principal rays in each of ten different substances solid and
liquid. The refraction increased in all from the red to the violet
end of the spectrum. The rays that are wanting in the solar
spectrum, which occasion the dark lines, were supposed to be
absorbed by the atmosphere of the sun. But the annular eclipse
which happened on the 15th of May, 1836, afforded Professor
Forbes the means of proving that the dark lines in question cannot
be attributed to the absorption of the solar atmosphere; they were
neither broader nor more numerous in the spectrum formed during
that phenomenon than at any other time, though the rays came
only from the circumference of the sun’s disc, and consequently
had to traverse a greater depth of his atmosphere.
Sir David Brewster found that in certain states of the atmosphere
the obscure lines become much broader, and some of
them deeply black; and he observed also, that, at the time the
sun was setting in a veil of red light, part of the luminous
spectrum was absorbed, whence he concluded that the earth’s
atmosphere had absorbed the rays of light which occupied the
dark bands. By direct experiments also the atmosphere was
observed to act powerfully upon the rayless lines.
When a lens is used along with a prism, longitudinal dark
lines of different breadths are seen to cross the bands, already
described, at right angles; these M. Ragona-Scina and M.
Babinet believe to be lines of interference which exist in light
that has passed through a convex lens.
The lines are different both in kind and number in the spectra
164of gases and flames. In a highly-magnified spectrum from light
passed through nitrous acid gas, Sir David Brewster counted
2000 dark bands. In the spectrum of a lamp, and generally of
all white flames, none of the defective lines are found; so all
such flames contain rays which do not exist in the light of the
sun or stars. Brilliant red lines appear in the spectrum produced
by the combustion of nitre upon charcoal; and in all
artificial flames dark and bright bands exist, sometimes corresponding
in position with those in the solar spectrum, and
sometimes not.
A sunbeam received on a screen, after passing through a small
round hole in a window-shutter, appears like a round white spot;
but when a prism is interposed, the beam no longer occupies the
same space. It is separated into the prismatic colours, and
spread over a line of considerable length, while its breadth remains
the same with that of the white spot. The act of spreading
or separation is called the dispersion of the coloured rays.
Dispersion always takes place in the plane of refraction, and is
greater as the angle of incidence is greater. It varies inversely
as the length of a wave of light, and directly as its velocity:
hence towards the blue end of the spectrum, where the undulations
of the rays are least, the dispersion is greatest. Substances
have very different dispersive powers; that is to say, the spectra
formed by two equal prisms of different substances, under precisely
the same circumstances, are of different lengths. Thus,
if a prism of flint-glass and one of crown-glass of equal refracting
angles be presented to two rays of white light at equal angles,
it will be found that the space over which the coloured rays are
dispersed by the flint-glass is much greater than the space occupied
by that produced by the crown-glass: and as the quantity
of dispersion depends upon the refracting angle of the prism, the
angles of the two prisms may be made such that, when the
prisms are placed close together with their edges turned opposite
ways, they will exactly oppose each other’s action, and will
refract the coloured rays equally, but in contrary directions, so
that an exact compensation will be effected, and the light will
be refracted without colour (N. 195). The achromatic telescope
is constructed on this principle. It consists of a tube with an
object-glass or lens at one end to bring the rays to a focus, and
form an image of the distant object, and a magnifying-glass at
165the other end to view the image thus formed. Now it is found
that the object-glass, instead of making the rays converge to
one point, disperses them, and gives a confused and coloured
image: but by constructing it of two lenses in contact, one of
flint and the other of crown-glass of certain forms and proportions,
the dispersion is counteracted, and a perfectly well-defined
and colourless image of the object is formed (N. 196). It was
thought to be impossible to produce refraction without colour,
till Mr. Hall, a gentleman of Worcestershire, constructed a telescope
on this principle in the year 1733; and twenty-five years
afterwards the achromatic telescope was brought to perfection by
Mr. Dollond, a celebrated optician in London.
By means of Mr. Fraunhofer’s determination of the refraction
of the principal rays in substances, their dispersive powers may
be found (N. 197).
A perfectly homogeneous colour is very rarely to be found;
but the tints of all substances are most brilliant when viewed in
light of their own colour. The red of a wafer is much more
vivid in red than in white light; whereas, if placed in homogeneous
yellow light, it can no longer appear red, because there is
not a ray of red in the yellow light. Were it not that the wafer,
like all other bodies, whether coloured or not, reflects white light
at its outer surface, it would appear absolutely black when
placed in yellow light.
After looking steadily for a short time at a coloured object,
such as a red wafer, on turning the eyes to a white substance, a
green image of the wafer appears, which is called the accidental
colour of red. All tints have their accidental colours: thus the
accidental colour of orange is blue; that of yellow is indigo;
of green, reddish white; of blue, orange-red; of violet, yellow;
and of white, black; and vice versâ. When the direct and
accidental colours are of the same intensity, the accidental
is then called the complementary colour, because any two
colours are said to be complementary to one another which produce
white when combined.
From experiments by M. Plateau of Brussels, it appears that
two complementary colours from direct impression, which would
produce white when combined, produce black, or extinguish one
another, by their union, when accidental; and also that the combination
of all the tints of the solar spectrum produces white
166light if they be from a direct impression on the eye, whereas
blackness results from a union of the same tints if they be accidental;
and in every case where the real colours produce white
by their combination, the accidental colours of the same tints
produce black. When the image of an object is impressed on
the retina only for a few moments, the picture left is exactly of
the same colour with the object, but in an extremely short time
the picture is succeeded by the accidental image. M. Plateau
attributes this phenomenon to a reaction of the retina after being
excited by direct vision, so that the accidental impression is of
an opposite nature to the corresponding direct impression. He
conceives that when the eye is excited by being fixed for a time
on a coloured object, and then withdrawn from the excitement,
it endeavours to return to its state of repose; but in so
doing, that it passes this point, and spontaneously assumes an
opposite condition, like a spring which, bent in one direction,
in returning to its state of rest bends as much the contrary way.
The accidental image thus results from a particular modification
of the organ of sight, in virtue of which it spontaneously gives
us a new sensation after it has been excited by direct vision.
If the prevailing impression be a very strong white light, its
accidental image is not black, but a variety of colours in succession.
According to M. Plateau, the retina offers a resistance to
the action of light, which increases with the duration of this
action; whence, after looking intently at an object for a long
time, it appears to decrease in brilliancy. The imagination has
a powerful influence on our optical impressions, and has been
known to revive the images of highly luminous objects months,
and even years, afterwards.</div></body></text></TEI>