<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="27">
248
SECTION XXVI.

Influence of Temperature on Vegetation—Vegetation varies with the Latitude
and Height above the Sea—Geographical Distribution of Land
Plants—Distribution of Marine Plants—Corallines, Shell-fish, Reptiles,
Insects, Birds, and Quadrupeds—Varieties of Mankind, yet identity of
Species.
The gradual decrease of temperature in the air and in the earth,
from the equator to the poles, is clearly indicated by its influence
on vegetation. In the valleys of the torrid zone, where the mean
annual temperature is very high, and where there is abundance
of light and moisture, nature adorns the soil with all the luxuriance
of perpetual summer. The palm, the bombax ceiba, and a
variety of magnificent trees, tower to the height of 150 or 200
feet above the banana, the bamboo, the arborescent fern, and
numberless other tropical productions, so interlaced by creeping
and parasitical plants, as often to present an impenetrable barrier.
But the richness of vegetation gradually diminishes with the
temperature; the splendour of the tropical forest is succeeded by
the regions of the vine and olive; these again yield to the verdant
meadows of more temperate climes; then follow the birch and
the pine, which probably owe their existence in very high latitudes
more to the warmth of the soil than to that of the air.
But even these enduring plants become dwarfish shrubs, till a
verdant carpet of mosses and lichens, enamelled with flowers,
exhibits the last sign of vegetable life during the short but fervid
summers at the polar regions. Such is the effect of cold and
diminished light on the vegetable kingdom, that the number of
species growing under the equator and in the northern latitudes
of 45° and 68° are in the proportion of the numbers 12, 4, and 1.
Notwithstanding the remarkable difference between a tropical
and polar flora, light and moisture seem to be almost the only
requisites for vegetation, since neither heat, cold, nor even comparative
darkness, absolutely destroy the fertility of nature. In
salt plains and sandy deserts alone hopeless barrenness prevails.
249Plants grow on the borders of hot springs: they form the oases
wherever moisture exists among the burning sands of Africa;
they are found in caverns almost void of light, though generally
blanched and feeble. The ocean teems with vegetation. The
snow itself not only produces a red lichen, discovered by Saussure
in the frozen declivities of the Alps, found in abundance by the
author crossing the Col de Bonhomme from Savoy to Piedmont,
and by the polar navigators in the Arctic regions, but it affords
shelter to the productions of these inhospitable climes against the
piercing winds that sweep over fields of everlasting ice. Those
undaunted mariners narrate that under this cold defence plants
spring up, dissolve the snow a few inches round, and the part
above, being again quickly frozen into a transparent sheet of ice,
admits the sun’s rays, which warm and cherish the plants in
this natural hothouse, till the returning summer renders such
protection unnecessary.
The chemical action of light is, however, absolutely requisite
for the growth of plants which derive their principal nourishment
from the atmosphere. They consume the carbonic acid gas,
nitrogen, aqueous vapour, and ammonia it contains; but it is the
chemical agency of light that enables them to absorb, decompose,
and consolidate these substances into wood, leaves, flowers, and
fruit. The atmosphere would soon be deprived of these elements
of vegetable life were they not perpetually supplied by the
animal creation; while, in return, plants decompose the moisture
they imbibe, and, having assimilated the carbonic acid gas, they
exhale oxygen for the maintenance of the animated creation, and
thus preserve a just equilibrium. Hence it is the combined and
powerful influences of the whole solar beams that give such
brilliancy to the tropical forests, while, with their decreasing
energy in the higher latitudes, vegetation becomes less vigorous.
On that account it is vain to expect that the fruit and flowers
raised in our hothouses can ever have the flavour, perfume, or
colouring equal to that which they acquire from the vivid light
of their native skies.
By far the greater number of the known species of plants are
indigenous in equinoctial America; Europe contains about half
the number; Asia, with its islands, somewhat less than Europe;
Australia, with the islands in the Pacific, still less; and in
Africa there are fewer known vegetable productions than in any
250part of the globe of equal extent, for that rich and luxuriant
region discovered by Dr. Livingstone has yet to be explored
botanically. Very few social plants, such as grasses and heaths
that cover large tracts of land, are to be found between the
tropics, except on the sea-coasts and elevated plains. Some
exceptions to this, however, are to be met with in the jungles of
the Deccan, &c. In the equatorial regions, where the heat is
always great, the distribution of plants depends upon the mean
annual temperature; whereas in temperate zones the distribution
is regulated in some degree by the summer heat. Some plants
require a gentle heat of long continuance, others flourish most
where the extremes of heat and cold are greater. The range of
wheat is very great; it may be cultivated as far north as the
60th degree of latitude; but in the torrid zone it will seldom
form an ear below an elevation of 4500 feet above the level of
the sea from exuberance of vegetation; nor will it ripen generally
above the height of 12,000 feet; in Tibet it ripens at a
still greater elevation. Colonel Sykes states that in the Deccan
wheat thrives as low as 1800 feet above the sea. The best wines
are produced between the 30th and 45th degrees of north latitude.
With regard to the vegetable kingdom, elevation is equivalent
to latitude as far as temperature is concerned. In
ascending the mountains of the torrid zone, the richness of the
tropical vegetation diminishes with the height; a succession of
plants similar to, though not identical with, those found in latitudes
of corresponding mean temperature takes place; the lofty
forests by degrees lose their splendour; stunted shrubs succeed;
till at last the progress of the lichen is checked by perpetual
snow. On the volcano of Teneriffe there are five successive
zones, each producing distinct families of plants. The first is the
region of vines, the next that of laurels; these are followed by
the region of pines, of Ericas or heaths, of grass; the whole
covering the declivity of the peak through an extent of 11,200
feet of perpendicular height.
Near the equator oaks flourish at the height of 9200 feet
above the sea; and, on the lofty range of the Himalaya, the
primula, the convallaria, and the veronica flower, but not the
primrose, the lily of the valley, or the veronica, which adorn our
meadows; for, although the herbarium collected by Moorcroft,
on his route from Neetee to Daba and Gartope in Chinese Tartary,
251at elevations as high or even higher than Mont Blanc,
abound in Alpine and European genera, the species are universally
different, with the single exception of the Rhodiola rosea,
which is identical with the species that blooms in Scotland. It
is not in this instance alone that similarity of climate obtains
without identity of productions; throughout the whole globe a
certain analogy both of structure and appearance is frequently
discovered between plants under corresponding circumstances
which are yet specifically different. It is even said that a difference
of 25° of latitude occasions a total change, not only of
vegetable productions, but of organised beings. Certain it is
that each separate region both of land and water, from the
frozen shores of the polar circles to the burning regions of the
torrid zone, possesses a flora peculiarly its own. The whole
globe has been divided by physical geographers into various
botanical districts, differing almost entirely in their specific vegetable
productions, the limits of which are most decided when
they are separated by a wide expanse of ocean, mountain chains,
sandy deserts, salt plains, or internal seas. A considerable
number of plants are common to the northern regions of Asia,
Europe, and America, where the continents almost unite; but,
in approaching the south, the floras of these three great divisions
of the globe differ more and more even in the same parallels of
latitude, which shows that temperature alone is not the cause of
the almost complete diversity of species that everywhere prevails.
The floras of China, Siberia, Tartary, of the European district
including central Europe and the coast of the Mediterranean,
and the Oriental region comprising the countries round the
Black and Caspian Seas, all differ in specific character. Only
twenty-four species were found by MM. Humboldt and Bonpland
in Equinoctial America identical with those of the Old World;
and Dr. Robert Brown not only found that a peculiar vegetation
exists in Australia between the 33rd and 35th parallels of
south latitude, but that at the eastern and western extremities of
these parallels not one species is common to both, and that certain
genera also are almost entirely confined to these spots. The
number of species common to Australia and Europe are only 166
out of 4100, and probably some of these have been conveyed
thither by the colonists; but the greater part of that continent
is still unexplored. However, this proportion exceeds what has
252hitherto been observed in southern Africa, and, from what has
been already stated, the proportion of European species in Equinoctial
America is still less.
Islands partake of the vegetation of the nearest continents;
but, when very remote from land, their floras are altogether
peculiar. The Aleutian Islands, extending between Asia and
America, partake of the vegetation of the northern parts of both
continents, and may have served as a chain of communication.
In Madeira and Teneriffe, the plants of Portugal, Spain, the
Azores, and of the northern coast of Africa, are found; and the
Canaries contain a great number of plants belonging to the
African coast. But each of these islands possesses a flora that
exists nowhere else; and St. Helena, standing alone in the midst
of the Atlantic Ocean, produces only two or three species of
plants recognised as belonging to any other part of the world.
It appears from the investigations of M. de Humboldt that
between the tropics the plants, such as grasses and palms, which
have only one seed-lobe, are to the tribe which have two seed-lobes,
like most of the European species, in the proportion of one
to four; in the temperate zones they are as one to six; and in
the Arctic regions, where mosses and lichens, which form the
lowest order of the vegetable creation, abound, the proportion is
as one to two. Annuals with one and two seed-lobes, in the
temperate zones, amount to one-sixth of the whole, omitting the
cryptogamia (N. 218); in the torrid zone they scarcely form
one-twentieth, and in Lapland one-thirtieth part. In approaching
the equator the ligneous exceed the number of herbaceous plants;
in America there are 120 different species of forest trees, whereas
in the same latitudes in Europe only 34 are to be found.
Similar laws regulate the distribution of marine plants. Groups
of algæ, or marine plants, affect particular temperatures or zones
of latitude and different depths, though some few genera prevail
throughout the ocean. The polar Atlantic basin to the 40th
degree of north latitude presents a well-defined vegetation. The
West India seas, including the Gulf of Mexico, the eastern coast
of South America, the Indian Ocean and its gulfs, the shores of
New Holland, and the neighbouring islands, have each their distinct
species. The Mediterranean possesses a vegetation peculiar
to itself, extending to the Black Sea; and the species of marine
plants on the coast of Syria and in the port of Alexandria differ
253almost entirely from those of Suez and the Red Sea. It is observed
that shallow seas have a different set of plants from such
as are deeper and colder; and, unlike terrestrial vegetation, the
algæ are more numerous in the mean latitudes than either
towards the equator or the poles. They vary also with the
depth: completely different kinds affect different depths, their
seeds being of such specific gravity as to remain and germinate
where the parent plant grew. The quantity of algæ in that
accumulation known as the sargassa or grassy sea is so great,
that the early navigators, Columbus and Lerius, compared it
to extensively inundated meadows: it impeded their ships, and
alarmed their sailors. It is in the North Atlantic, a little to the
west of the meridian of Fayal, one of the Azores, between the
25th and 36th parallels of latitude. A smaller bank lies between
the 22nd and 26th degrees of north latitude, about 80 leagues
west of the meridian of the Bahama Islands. These masses
chiefly consist of one or two species of sargassa, the most extensive
genus of the order Fucoideæ.
Some of the seaweeds grow to enormous lengths, and all are
highly coloured, though many of them must grow in deep water.
Light, however, may not be the only principle on which the
colour of vegetables depends, since Baron Humboldt met with
green plants growing in complete darkness in one of the mines
at Freyberg.
In the dark and tranquil caves of the ocean, on the shores
alternately covered and deserted by the restless waves, on the
lofty mountain and extended plain, in the chilly regions of the
north, and in the genial warmth of the south, specific diversity is
a general law of the vegetable kingdom, which cannot be accounted
for by diversity of climate; and yet the similarity,
though not identity, of species is such, under the same isothermal
lines, that if the number of species belonging to one of the great
families of plants be known in any part of the globe, the whole
number of the flowering or more perfect plants, and also the
number of species composing the other vegetable families, may
be estimated with considerable accuracy.
Various opinions have been formed on the original or primitive
distribution of plants over the face of the globe; but, since
botanical geography has become a science, the phenomena observed
254have led to the conclusion that vegetable creation must
have taken place in a number of distinctly different centres, as
the islands and continents rose above the ocean, each of which
was the original seat of a certain number of peculiar species
which at first grew there and nowhere else. Heaths are exclusively
confined to the Old World; and no indigenous rose-tree
has ever been seen in the New, the whole southern hemisphere
being destitute of that beautiful and fragrant plant. But this is
still more confirmed by multitudes of particular plants, having
an entirely local and insulated existence, growing spontaneously
in some particular spot, and in no other place: for example, the
cedar of Lebanon, which grows indigenously on that mountain,
and in no other part of the world. On the other hand, as there
can be no doubt that many races of plants have been extinguished,
Sir John Herschel thinks it possible that these solitary
instances may be the last surviving remnants of the same group
universally disseminated, but in course of extinction, or that
perhaps two processes may be going on at the same time:—“Some
groups may be spreading from their foci, others retreating
to their last holds.”
The same laws obtain in the distribution of the animal creation.
Even the microscopic existences, which seem to be the
most widely spread, have their specific localities; and the
zoophyte (N. 219), occupying the next lowest place in animated
nature, is widely scattered through the seas of the torrid zone,
each species being confined to the district and depth best suited
to its wants. Mollusks, or the animals of shells, decrease in
size and beauty with their distance from the equator; and not
only each sea and every basin of the ocean, but each depth, is
inhabited by its peculiar tribe of fish. Indeed, MM. Peron and
Le Sueur assert that, among the many thousands of marine
animals which they had examined, there is not a single animal
of the southern regions which is not distinguishable by essential
characters from the analogous species in the northern seas.
Reptiles are not exempt from the general law. The saurian
(N. 220) tribes of the four quarters of the globe differ in
species; and, although warm countries abound in venomous
snakes, they are specifically different in different localities, and
decrease both in numbers and in the virulence of their poison
255with decrease of temperature. The dispersion of insects necessarily
follows that of the vegetables which supply their food;
and in general it is observed that each kind of plant is peopled
by its peculiar inhabitants. Each species of bird has its peculiar
haunt, notwithstanding the locomotive powers of the winged
tribes. The emu is confined to Australia, the condor to the
Andes and their declivities, and the bearded vulture or lemmergeyer
to the Alps. Some birds, like the common sparrow, have
a wide range; but those met with in every country are few
in number. Quadrupeds are distributed in the same manner
wherever man has not interfered. Such as are indigenous in one
country are not the same with their congeners in another; and,
with the exception of some kind of bats, no mammiferous animal
is indigenous in the Polynesian Archipelago, nor in any of the
islands on the borders of the central part of the Pacific.
In reviewing the infinite variety of organised beings that
people the surface of the globe, nothing is more remarkable than
the distinctions which characterise the different tribes of mankind,
from the ebony skin of the torrid zone to the fair and
ruddy complexion of the Scandinavian—a difference which
existed in the earliest recorded times, since the African is represented
in the sacred writings to have been as black as he is at
the present day, and the most ancient Egyptian paintings confirm
that truth; yet it appears, from a comparison of the principal
circumstances relating to the animal economy or physical
character of the various tribes of mankind, that the different
races are identical in species. Many attempts have been made
to trace the various tribes back to a common origin, by collating
the numerous languages which are or have been spoken. Some
classes of these have few or no words in common, yet exhibit a
remarkable analogy in the laws of their grammatical construction.
The languages spoken by the native American nations
afford examples of these; indeed, the refinement in the grammatical
construction of the tongues of the American savages
leads to the belief that they must originally have been spoken
by a much more civilised class of mankind. Some tongues have
little or no resemblance in structure, though they correspond
extensively in their vocabularies, as the Syrian dialects. In all
these cases it may be inferred that the nations speaking the languages
256in question descended from the same stock; but the probability
of a common origin is much greater in the Indo-European
nations, whose languages, such as the Sanscrit, Greek, Latin,
German, &c., have an affinity both in structure and correspondence
of vocables. In many tongues not the smallest resemblance
can be traced; length of time, however, may have obliterated
original identity; but so many ages have passed before the subject
became a study, and so many languages have worn out of
use, that it may be doubted whether any satisfactory result
will ever be arrived at with regard to the original speech of
mankind.</div></body></text></TEI>