<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="33">
322
SECTION XXXII.

Magneto-Electricity—Volta-Electric Induction—Magneto-Electric Induction—Identity
in the Action of Electricity and Magnetism—Description
of a Magneto-Electric Apparatus and its Effects—Identity of
Magnetism and Electricity—The Submarine Telegraph.
From the law of action and reaction being equal and contrary,
it might be expected that, as electricity powerfully affects
magnets, so, conversely, magnetism ought to produce electrical
phenomena. By proving this very important fact from the following
series of interesting and ingenious experiments, Dr. Faraday
has added another branch to the science which he has named
magneto-electricity. A great quantity of copper wire was coiled
in the form of a helix round one half of a ring of soft iron, and
connected with a galvanic battery; while a similar helix connected
with a galvanometer was wound round the other half of the
ring, but not touching the first helix. As soon as contact was made
with the battery, the needle of the galvanometer was deflected.
But the action was transitory; for, when the contact was continued,
the needle returned to its usual position, and was not
affected by the continual flow of the electricity through the wire
connected with the battery. As soon, however, as the contact
was broken, the needle of the galvanometer was again deflected,
but in the contrary direction. Similar effects were produced by
an apparatus consisting of two helices of copper wire coiled
round a block of wood, instead of iron, from which Dr. Faraday
infers that the electric current passing from the battery through
one wire induces a similar current through the other wire, but
only at the instant of contact, and that a momentary current is
induced in a contrary direction when the passage of the electricity
is suddenly interrupted. These brief currents or waves of electricity
were found to be capable of magnetizing needles, of passing
through a small extent of fluid, and, when charcoal points
were interposed in the current of the induced helix, a minute
spark was perceived as often as the contacts were made or
323broken, but neither chemical action nor any other electric effects
were obtained. A deviation of the needle of the galvanometer
took place when common magnets were employed instead of the
Voltaic current; so that the magnetic and electric forces are
identical in their effects in this experiment. Again, when a
helix formed of 220 feet of copper wire, into which a cylinder of
soft iron was introduced, was placed between the north and south
poles of two bar magnets, and connected with the galvanometer
by means of wires from each extremity, as often as the magnets
were brought into contact with the iron cylinder it became magnetic
by induction, and produced a deflection in the needle of the
galvanometer. On continuing the contact the needle resumed
its natural position, and, when the contact was broken, deflection
took place in the opposite direction; when the magnetic contacts
were reversed, the deflection was reversed also. With strong
magnets, so powerful was the action, that the needle of the galvanometer
whirled round several times successively; and similar
effects were produced by the mere approximation or removal of
the helix to the poles of the magnets. Thus it was proved that
magnets produce the very same effects on the galvanometer that
electricity does. Though at that time no chemical decomposition
was effected by these momentary currents which emanate
from the magnets, they agitated the limbs of a frog; and Dr.
Faraday justly observes, that “an agent which is conducted
along metallic wires in the manner described, which, whilst so
passing, possesses the peculiar magnetic actions and force of a
current of electricity, which can agitate and convulse the limbs
of a frog, and which finally can produce a spark by its discharge
through charcoal, can only be electricity.” Soon after he completely
established the identity of the two powers by producing
the spark, heating metallic wires, and accomplishing chemical
decomposition. Hence it appears that electrical currents are
evolved by magnets, which produce the same phenomena with
the electrical currents from the Voltaic battery: they, however,
differ materially in this respect—that time is required for the
exercise of the magnetico-electric induction, whereas Volta-electric
induction is instantaneous.
Thus the effect of induction or the influence of the spiral wire
in increasing the electric and magnetic power is very great
indeed, and to that we are indebted for the electric telegraph, for
324Voltaic electricity alone is too feeble to overcome the resistance
of a long wire.
Electric currents, whatever their tension may be, produce the
phenomena of induction; these again induce other currents in bodies
capable of induction, and so on indefinitely; the first and second
flow in the same direction, the others alternately opposite and
direct. They all give the shock and can decompose water, but
with Volta-electric currents the elevation of temperature as well
as their physiological and magnetic effects are produced by instantaneous
actions, which only depend upon the quantity and
tension of the current, and by no means on its duration, for induced
currents only exist for a moment when the circuit of the
battery is broken. The most energetic physiological effects are
produced by a small quantity of electricity moving with great
velocity. The apparatus first employed by Dr. Faraday is in
effect a battery, where the agent is the magnetic instead of
the Voltaic force, or, in other words, electricity, and is thus
constructed:—
A very powerful horseshoe magnet, formed of twelve steel
plates in close approximation, is placed in a horizontal position.
An armature, consisting of a bar of the purest soft iron, has
each of its ends bent at right angles, so that the faces of those
ends may be brought directly opposite and close to the poles of
the magnet when required. Ten copper wires—covered with
silk, in order to insulate them—are wound round one half of the
bar of soft iron, as a compound helix: ten other wires, also insulated,
are wound round the other half of the bar. The extremities
of the first set of wires are in metallic connexion with a
circular disc, which dips into a cup of mercury, while the ends
of the other ten wires in the opposite direction are soldered to a
projecting screw-piece, which carries a slip of copper with two
opposite points. The steel magnet is stationary; but when the
armature, together with its appendages, is made to rotate vertically,
the edge of the disc always remains immersed in the
mercury, while the points of the copper slip alternately dip in it
and rise above it. By the ordinary laws of induction, the armature
becomes a temporary magnet while its bent ends are opposite
the poles of the steel magnet, and ceases to be magnetic when
they are at right angles to them. It imparts its temporary magnetism
to the helices which concentrate it; and, while one set
325conveys a current to the disc, the other set conducts the opposite
current to the copper slip. As the edge of the revolving disc is
always immersed in the mercury, one set of wires is constantly
maintained in contact with it, and the circuit is only completed
when a point of the copper slip dips in the mercury also; but
the circuit is broken the moment that point rises above it. Thus,
by the rotation of the armature, the circuit is alternately broken
and renewed; and as it is only at these moments that electric
action is manifested, a brilliant spark takes place every time the
copper point leaves the surface of the mercury. Platinum wire
is ignited, shocks smart enough to be disagreeable are given, and
water is decomposed with astonishing rapidity, by the same
means; which proves, beyond a doubt, the identity of the magnetic
and electric agencies, and places Dr. Faraday, whose experiments
established the principle, in the first rank of experimental
philosophers.
A magneto-electric machine has been recently constructed by
Mr. Henley, of enormous power. It consists of two permanent
magnets, from which the induction is obtained; each of these is
formed of thirty horseshoe steel magnets, two feet and a half
long, and from four to five inches broad, and each is surrounded
by a coil of wire six miles long, coated with silk to insulate the
coils. A shock from these wires would be instantaneous death.
This apparatus will ultimately be employed to send a stream of
electricity through long submarine and subterraneous wires; but
a Volta-electric machine has hitherto been used, in which the
electricity is generated by a galvanic battery instead of magnets.
Induction, or the effect of the spiral wires in augmenting the
power of Voltaic electricity, is admirably illustrated in the
Atlantic telegraph.
Wires that are to convey electricity under ground, or through
water, must be defended from injury and insulated to prevent
the lateral escape of the electricity. For that purpose the cable
that is laid at the bottom of the Atlantic, from near Valentia in
Ireland to Trinity Bay in Newfoundland, is formed of seven fine
copper wires which convey the electricity, bound together by a
coating of gutta percha, over which there are layers of cloth
dipped in pitch, and then the whole is covered by steel wires
twisted together in strands and twined round in long close spirals,
forming a cord or cable not more than an inch and a quarter in
326diameter, and 2100 miles long. The use of the gutta percha is
to insulate the wires; the other coatings are merely for protection.
The Voltaic battery which generates the electricity consists
of 40 cells, the plates of which are alternately of zinc and
platinized silver, each about nine inches square, the exciting fluid
being dilute sulphuric acid. Although the force developed by
this battery is so great that a piece of iron three inches long and
three eighths of an inch in diameter placed in contact with the
poles may be consumed in a few minutes, it is absolutely incapable
of sending a current of electricity through wires 2500 miles
long, on account of their resistance, without the aid of Dr. Faraday’s
inductive action. It is only the primary agent for inducing
a current of sufficient strength.
To accomplish that, many thousand yards of fine copper wire
coated with silk are wound round a hollow soft iron cylinder; the
whole is then coated by gutta percha, and the end of the wire is
joined to the wires in the cable so as to form a continuous line
from Valentia to Newfoundland. A second copper wire, shorter
but thicker than the preceding, and also insulated by a coating of
silk, is wound round the cylinder above the gutta percha: when
the ends of this thick wire are brought into contact with the
poles of the battery, currents of electricity flow through it,
between pole and pole, and in their passage temporarily convert
the hollow iron cylinder into a powerful electro-magnet, which
by its reaction induces a current of electricity in the fine wire of
sufficient power to cross the Atlantic. The efficiency of the
electric telegraph depends upon the power we possess of breaking
and renewing the current at pleasure, since by that means distinct
and successive signals are made from station to station.
In the Atlantic cable positive and negative electricity are transmitted
alternately; the electricity is sent to America from alternate
poles, and the current returns again through the water,
which completes the circuit.
The passage of electricity through a cable or telegraphic wire
in air is sensibly instantaneous; that through a cable, whether
extended in water or under ground, requires time on account
of lateral induction through the gutta percha; for the electricity,
in passing through the wires, induces the opposite electricity on
the surface of the water or moist earth in contact with the cable,
and in that respect it is precisely like a Leyden jar, the gutta
327percha representing the glass. As the power of induction is proportional
to the tension of the electricity, and as the tension is
continually diminished by the resistance of the wires, the induction
is continually diminished and requires a longer time. Electricity
took two seconds to pass through a cable 768 miles long,
laid under ground from London to Manchester, and back again
twice; while in air it was all but instantaneous, because the inductive
capacity of air is very much less than that of water or moist
earth. In the experiment with the cable under ground it took two-thirds
of a second to overcome the resistance of the wires, and
then the velocity of the electricity was 1000 miles in a second,
and it was the same whatever the intensity of the electricity.
It has already been mentioned that the efficiency of the electric
telegraph depends upon the breaking and renewing the current
of electricity by means of which a succession of waves of electricity
are sent through the conducting wires. Now it has been
ascertained that three electric waves may travel simultaneously
through the wires of the Atlantic telegraph with sufficient intervals
between them to record the indications they are intended to
convey; that is, three signals can be intelligibly and practically
transmitted in two seconds.
The original design, structure, and difficulty of depositing the
cable are only equalled by the talent and perseverance with
which it has been done. The 5th of August, 1858, will be
memorable for the accomplishment of the boldest enterprise that
ever was undertaken by man, and which is only the beginning
of a vast submarine communication that will ultimately encircle
the globe. It has been granted to British genius thus to annihilate
time and space, in order to connect all mankind into one
great family for their moral and religious advancement; and,
whatever may be the fate of the British Islands in the course of
ages, to their energetic race the glory will remain of having
been the chief instruments in the hands of Providence for the
civilization of the world—a civilization which will extend with
the development of their numerous colonies into great independent
Christian states, like those of the Union in North
America. The thunderbolt snatched from heaven by Franklin
now passes through the depths of the Atlantic as a messenger of
peace between the kindred nations.[16]
328In telegraphs on land the intensity of the battery or magnets
is increased by induction on the same principle. It is by intensity
that the electric current is enabled to pass through the wires, and
that is augmented by increasing the number of coils round the
cylinder: however, it is only advantageous when the distance
between the stations is great, for then the resistance in the additional
coils bears a small proportion to the resistance offered by
very long wires, but a very great proportion to that opposed in
very short ones. The nice adjustment for each case has been
determined by the experiments of eminent electricians, and all
the arrangements have been brought to great perfection in this
wonderful triumph of science, which is due to Volta, who called
into existence the fiery stream, and to Faraday, who has given it
the energy of the lightning.
When the length of the wire in the helices of an electro-magnet
is very great, it offers increasing resistance to the passage of the
electricity, so that the cessation of magnetism is not instantaneous
when the contact with the Voltaic battery is broken. To remedy
that defect an instrument has been invented which instantaneously
deprives the apparatus of the remaining electricity. A
great length of fine wire gives the severest shocks, while a shorter
and thicker wire gives the longest sparks and ignites the greatest
quantity of platinum wire.
Ruhmkorff’s electro-inductive apparatus has either been improved,
or new machines constructed, by Messrs. Grove, Gassiot,
and Joule, of intense energy. Indeed, so great is the energy of
electro-induction, that hopes were entertained of its superseding
steam as a motive power. For the current of electricity from an
electro-magnet can be made to flow in opposite directions, so as
to produce alternate attractions and repulsions, and consequently
a continued motion, which might be applied as a motive force
to machinery. However, Mr. Joule has proved that the power
developed by one pound of coal in combustion is to that produced
by one pound of zinc consumed in Mr. Grove’s powerful electro-magnetic
apparatus as nine to one, so that, even if zinc were as
cheap as coal, and a Voltaic battery as easily kept in order as an
engine-furnace, electricity will not supersede steam as a motive
power.
A current of electricity traversing a conductor gives out a
quantity of heat determined by fixed laws, the amount of which
is invariable as long as the machine to which it is applied remains
329at rest; but the instant the machine is set in motion a reaction
takes place in the intensity of the current, causing a diminution
in the quantity of heat, because the heat that disappears is converted
into the mechanical force exerted by the engine.
Mr. Joule’s experiments prove that, whenever a current of
electricity is generated by a magneto-electric machine, the quantity
of heat evolved by that current has a constant relation to the
power required to work the machine; and on the other hand,
whenever an engine is worked by a Voltaic battery, that the
power developed is at the expense of the calorific force of the
battery for a given consumption of zinc, the mechanical effect
produced having a fixed relation to the heat lost in the Voltaic
current. The obvious conclusion Mr. Joule draws from these
experiments is, that heat and mechanical power are convertible
into one another, and it becomes evident, therefore, that heat is
either the vis viva or living force of ponderable particles, or a
state of attraction and repulsion capable of generating vis viva
(N. 222).</div></body></text></TEI>