<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="9">
55
SECTION VIII.

Masses of Planets that have no Satellites determined from their Perturbations—Masses
of the others obtained from the Motions of their Satellites—Masses
of the Sun, the Earth, of Jupiter and of the Jovial
System—Mass of the Moon—Real Diameters of Planets, how obtained—Size
of Sun, Densities of the Heavenly Bodies—Formation of Astronomical
Tables—Requisite Data and Means of obtaining them.
The masses of such planets as have no satellites are known by
comparing the inequalities they produce in the motions of the
earth and of each other, determined theoretically, with the same
inequalities given by observation; for the disturbing cause must
necessarily be proportional to the effect it produces. The masses
of the satellites themselves may also be compared with that of
the sun by their perturbations. Thus, it is found, from the
comparison of a vast number of observations with La Place’s
theory of Jupiter’s satellites, that the mass of the sun is no less
than 65,000,000 times greater than the least of these moons.
But, as the quantities of matter in any two primary planets are
directly as the cubes of the mean distances at which their satellites
revolve, and inversely as the squares of their periodic times
(N. 135), the mass of the sun and of any planets which have
satellites may be compared with the mass of the earth. In this
manner it is computed that the mass of the sun is 354,936 times
that of the earth; whence the great perturbations of the moon,
and the rapid motion of the perigee and nodes of her orbit
(N. 136). Even Jupiter, the largest of the planets, has been
found by Professor Airy to be 1047·871 times less than the sun;
and, indeed, the mass of the whole Jovial system is not more
than the 1054·4th part of that of the sun. So that the mass of
the satellites bears a very small proportion to that of their primary.
The mass of the moon is determined from several sources—from
her action on the terrestrial equator, which occasions the nutation
in the axis of rotation; from her horizontal parallax; from an
inequality she produces in the sun’s longitude; and from her
action on the tides. The three first quantities, computed from
56theory and compared with their observed values, give her mass
respectively equal to the
1⁄71,
1⁄74·2,
and
1⁄69·2,
part of that of the earth,
which do not differ much from each other. Dr. Brinkley has
found it to be
1⁄80
from the constant of lunar nutation: but, from
the moon’s action in raising the tides, her mass appears to be
about the
1⁄75
part of that of the earth—a value that cannot differ
much from the truth.
The apparent diameters of the sun, moon, and planets are
determined by measurement; therefore their real diameters may
be compared with that of the earth; for the real diameter of a
planet is to the real diameter of the earth, or 7926 miles, as the
apparent diameter of the planet to the apparent diameter of the
earth as seen from the planet, that is, to twice the parallax of the
planet. According to Bessel, the mean apparent diameter of
the sun is 1923ʺ·64, and with the solar parallax 8ʺ·5776, it
will be found that the diameter of the sun is about 886,877
miles. Therefore, if the centre of the sun were to coincide with
the centre of the earth, his volume would not only include the
orbit of the moon, but would extend nearly as far again; for the
moon’s mean distance from the earth is about sixty times the
earth’s equatorial radius, or 238,793 miles: so that twice the distance
of the moon is 477,586 miles, which differs but little from
the solar radius; his equatorial radius is probably not much less
than the major axis of the lunar orbit. The diameter of the
moon is only 2160 miles; and Jupiter’s diameter of 88,200 miles
is very much less than that of the sun; the diameter of Pallas
does not much exceed 79 miles, so that an inhabitant of that
planet, in one of our steam carriages, might go round his world
in a few hours. The diameters of Lutetia and Atalanta are only
8 and 4 miles respectively; but the whole of the 55 telescopic
planets are so small, that their united mass is probably not more
than the fifth or sixth part of that of the moon.
The densities of bodies are proportional to their masses, divided
by their volumes. Hence, if the sun and planets be assumed to
be spheres, their volumes will be as the cubes of their diameters.
Now, the apparent diameters of the sun and earth, at their mean
distance, are 1923ʺ·6 and 17ʺ·1552, and the mass of the earth is
the 354,936th part of that of the sun taken as the unit. It
follows, therefore, that the earth is four times as dense as
the sun. But the sun is so large that his attractive force would
57cause bodies to fall through about 334·65 feet in a second.
Consequently, if he were habitable by human beings, they would
be unable to move, since their weight would be thirty times
as great as it is here. A man of moderate size would weigh
about two tons at the surface of the sun; whereas at the surface
of some of the new planets he would be so light that it would be
impossible to stand steady, since he would only weigh a few
pounds. The mean density of the earth has been determined by
the following method. Since a comparison of the action of two
planets upon a third gives the ratio of the masses of these two
planets, it is clear that, if we can compare the effect of the
whole earth with the effect of any part of it, a comparison may
be instituted between the mass of the whole earth and the mass
of that part of it. Now a leaden ball was weighed against the
earth by comparing the effects of each upon a pendulum; the
nearness of the smaller mass making it produce a sensible effect
as compared with that of the larger: for by the laws of attraction
the whole earth must be considered as collected in its centre.
By this method it has been found that the mean density of the
earth is 5·660 times greater than that of water at the temperature
of 62° of Fahrenheit’s thermometer. The late Mr. Baily,
whose accuracy as an experimental philosopher is acknowledged,
was unremittingly occupied nearly four years in accomplishing
this very important object. In order to ascertain the mean
density of the earth still more perfectly, Mr. Airy made a series
of experiments to compare the simultaneous oscillations of two
pendulums, one at the bottom of the Harton coal-pit, 1260 feet
deep, in Northumberland, and the other on the surface of the
earth immediately above it. The oscillations of the pendulums
were compared with an astronomical clock at each station, and
the time was instantaneously transmitted from one to the other
by a telegraphic wire. The oscillations were observed for more
than 100 hours continuously, when it was found that the lower
pendulum made
21⁄2
oscillations more in 24 hours than the upper
one. The experiment was repeated for the same length of time
with the same result; but on this occasion the upper pendulum
was taken to the bottom of the mine and the lower brought to
the surface. From the difference between the oscillations at the
two stations it appears that gravitation at the bottom of the
mine exceeds that at the surface by the
1⁄19190
part, and that the
58mean density of the earth is 6·565, which is greater than that
obtained by Mr. Baily by ·89. While employed on the trigonometrical
survey of Scotland, Colonel James determined the mean
density of the earth to be 5·316, from a deviation of the
plumb-line amounting to 2ʺ, caused by the attraction of Arthur’s
Seat and the heights east of Edinburgh: it agrees more nearly with
the density found by Mr. Baily than with that deduced from Mr.
Airy’s experiments. All the planets and satellites appear to be
of less density than the earth. The motions of Jupiter’s satellites
show that his density increases towards his centre. Were his
mass homogeneous, his equatorial and polar axes would be in the
ratio of 41 to 36, whereas they are observed to be only as 41 to
38. The singular irregularities in the form of Saturn, and the
great compression of Mars, prove the internal structure of these
two planets to be very far from uniform.
Before entering on the theory of rotation, it may not be foreign
to the subject to give some idea of the methods of computing
the places of the planets, and of forming astronomical tables.
Astronomy is now divided into the three distinct departments of
theory, observation, and computation. Since the problem of the
three bodies can only be solved by approximation, the analytical
astronomer determines the position of a planet in space by a
series of corrections. Its place in its circular orbit is first found,
then the addition or subtraction of the equation of the centre
(N. 48) to or from its mean place gives its position in the
ellipse. This again is corrected by the application of the principal
periodic inequalities. But, as these are determined for
some particular position of the three bodies, they require to be
corrected to suit other relative positions. This process is continued
till the corrections become less than the errors of observation,
when it is obviously unnecessary to carry the approximation
further. The true latitude and distance of the planet from the
sun are obtained by methods similar to those employed for the
longitude.
As the earth revolves equably about its axis in 24 hours, at
the rate of 15° in an hour, time becomes a measure of angular
motion, and the principal element in astronomy, where the object
is to determine the exact state of the heavens and the successive
changes it undergoes in all ages, past, present, and to come.
Now, the longitude, latitude, and distance of a planet from the
59sun are given in terms of the time, by general analytical formulæ.
These formulæ will consequently give the exact place of the body
in the heavens, for any time assumed at pleasure, provided they
can be reduced to numbers. But before the calculator begins
his task the observer must furnish the necessary data, which
are, obviously, the forms of the orbits, and their positions with
regard to the plane of the ecliptic (N. 57). It is therefore necessary
to determine by observation, for each planet, the length of
the major axis of its orbit, the excentricity, the inclination of the
orbit to the plane of the ecliptic, the longitudes of its perihelion
and ascending node at a given time, the periodic time of the
planet, and its longitude at any instant arbitrarily assumed, as
an origin from whence all its subsequent and antecedent longitudes
are estimated. Each of these quantities is determined
from that position of the planet on which it has most influence.
For example, the sum of the greatest and least distances of the
planet from the sun is equal to the major axis of the orbit, and
their difference is equal to twice the excentricity. The longitude
of the planet, when at its least distance from the sun, is the
same with the longitude of the perihelion; the greatest latitude
of the planet is equal to the inclination of the orbit: the longitude
of the planet, when in the plane of the ecliptic in passing towards
the north, is the longitude of the ascending node, and the
periodic time is the interval between two consecutive passages of
the planet through the same node, a small correction being made
for the precession of the node during the revolution of the planet
(N. 137). Notwithstanding the excellence of instruments and
the accuracy of modern observers, unavoidable errors of observation
can only be compensated by finding the value of each element
from the mean of a thousand, or even many thousands of
observations. For as it is probable that the errors are not all in
one direction, but that some are in excess and others in defect,
they will compensate each other when combined.
However, the values of the elements determined separately
can only be regarded as approximate, because they are so connected
that the estimation of any one independently will induce
errors in the others. The excentricity depends upon the longitude
of the perihelion, the mean motion depends upon the major
axis, the longitude of the node upon the inclination of the orbit,
and vice versâ. Consequently, the place of a planet computed
60with the approximate data will differ from its observed place.
Then the difficulty is to ascertain what elements are most in
fault, since the difference in question is the error of all; that is
obviated by finding the errors of some thousands of observations,
and combining them, so as to correct the elements simultaneously,
and to make the sum of the squares of the errors a minimum
with regard to each element (N. 138). The method of accomplishing
this depends upon the Theory of Probabilities; a subject
fertile in most important results in the various departments of
science and of civil life, and quite indispensable in the determination
of astronomical data. A series of observations continued
for some years will give approximate values of the secular
and periodic inequalities, which must be corrected from time to
time, till theory and observation agree. And these again will
give values of the masses of the bodies forming the solar system,
which are important data in computing their motions. The
periodic inequalities derived from a great number of observations
are employed for the determination of the values of the masses
till such time as the secular inequalities shall be perfectly
known, which will then give them with all the necessary precision.
When all these quantities are determined in numbers,
the longitude, latitude, and distance of the planet from the sun
are computed for stated intervals, and formed into tables, arranged
according to the time estimated from a given epoch, so
that the place of the body may be determined from them by
inspection alone, at any instant for perhaps a thousand years
before and after that epoch. By this tedious process, tables have
been computed for all the great planets, and several of the
small, besides the moon and the satellites of Jupiter. In
the present state of astronomy the masses and elements of the
orbits are pretty well known, so that the tables only require
to be corrected from time to time as observations become
more accurate. Those containing the motions of Jupiter,
Saturn, and Uranus have already been twice constructed within
the last thirty years, and the tables of Jupiter and Saturn
agree almost perfectly with modern observation. The following
prediction will be found in the sixth edition of this book, published
in the year 1842: “Those of Uranus, however, are already
defective, probably because the discovery of that planet in 1781
is too recent to admit of much precision in the determination of
61its motions, or that possibly it may be subject to disturbances
from some unseen planet revolving about the sun beyond the
present boundaries of our system. If, after a lapse of years, the
tables formed from a combination of numerous observations
should be still inadequate to represent the motions of Uranus,
the discrepancies may reveal the existence, nay, even the mass and
orbit, of a body placed for ever beyond the sphere of vision.”[5]
That prediction has been fulfilled since the seventh edition of
this book was published. Not only the existence of Neptune,
revolving at the distance of three thousand millions of miles from
the sun, has been discovered from his disturbing action on
Uranus, but his mass, the form and position of his orbit in space,
and his periodic time had been determined before the planet had
been seen, and the planet itself was discovered in the very point
of the heavens which had been assigned to it. It had been
noticed for years that the perturbation of Uranus had increased
in an unaccountable manner (N. 139). After the disturbing
action of all the known planets had been determined, it was
found that, between the years 1833 and 1837, the observed and
computed distance of Uranus from the sun differed by 240,000
miles, which is about the mean distance of the moon from the
earth, while, in 1841, the error in the geocentric longitude of the
planet amounted to 96ʺ. These discrepancies were therefore
attributed to the attraction of some unseen and unknown planet,
consequently they gave rise to a case altogether unprecedented
in the history of astronomy. Heretofore it was required to determine
the disturbing action of one known planet upon another.
Whereas the inverse problem had now to be solved, in which it
was required to find the place of an unknown body in the heavens,
at a given time, together with its mass, and the form and position
of its orbit, from the disturbance it produced on the motions
of another. The difficulty was extreme, because all the elements
of the orbit of Uranus were erroneous from the action of Neptune,
and those of Neptune’s orbit were unknown. In this dilemma
it was necessary to form some hypothesis with regard to the
unknown planet; it was therefore assumed, according to Bode’s
empirical law on the mean distances of the planets, that it
was revolving at twice the distance of Uranus from the sun.
62In fact, the periodic time of Uranus is about 84 years, and, as the
discrepancies in his motions increased slowly and regularly, it
was evident that it would require a planet with a much longer
periodic time to produce them—moreover, it was clear that the
new planet must be exterior to Uranus, otherwise it would have
disturbed the motions of Saturn.
Another circumstance tended to lessen the difficulty; the
latitude of Uranus was not much affected, therefore it was concluded
that the inclination of the orbit of the unknown body
must be very small, and, as that of the orbit of Uranus is only
46ʹ 28ʺ·4, both planets were assumed to be moving in the plane
of the ecliptic, and thus the elements of the orbit of the unknown
planet were reduced from six to four. Having thus assumed
that the unknown body was revolving in a circle in the plane
of the ecliptic, the analytical expression of its action on the
motion of Uranus, when in numerous points of its orbit, was
compared with the observed longitude of Uranus, through a
regular series of years, by means of which the faulty elements
of the orbit of Uranus were eliminated, or got rid of, and there
only remained a relation between the mass of the new planet and
three of the elements of its orbit; and it then was necessary to
assume such a value for two of them as would suit the rest.
That was accomplished so dexterously, that the perturbations of
Uranus were perfectly conformable to the motions of Neptune,
moving in the orbit thus found, and the place of the new planet
exactly agreed with observation. Subsequently its orbit and
motions have been determined more accurately.
The honour of this admirable effort of genius is shared by Mr.
Adams and M. Le Verrier, who, independently of each other,
arrived at these wonderful results. Mr. Adams had determined
the mass and apparent diameter of Neptune, with all the circumstances
of its motion, eight months before M. Le Verrier had
terminated his results, and had also pointed out the exact spot
where the planet would be found; but the English observers
neglected to look for it till M. Le Verrier made known his researches,
and communicated its position to Dr. Galle, at Berlin,
who found it the very first night he looked for it, and then it
was evident that it would have been seen in the place Mr. Adams
had assigned to it eight months before had it been looked for. So
closely did the results of these two great mathematicians agree.
63Neptune has a diameter of 39,793 miles, consequently he is
nearly 200 times larger than the earth, and may be seen with a
telescope of moderate power. His motion is retrograde at present,
and six times slower than that of the earth. At so great a
distance from the sun it can only have the
1⁄1300th
part of the light
and heat the earth receives; but having a satellite, the deficiency
of light may in some measure be supplied.
The prediction may now be transferred from Uranus to Neptune,
whose perturbations may reveal the existence of a planet
still further removed, which may for ever remain beyond the
reach of telescopic vision—yet its mass, the form and position of its
orbit, and all the circumstances of its motion may become known,
and the limits of the solar system may still be extended hundreds
of millions of miles.
The mean distance of Neptune from the sun has subsequently
proved to be only 2893 millions of miles, and the period of his
revolution 166 years, so that Baron Bode’s law, of the interval
between the orbits of any two planets being twice as great as the
inferior interval and half of the superior, fails in the case of
Neptune, though it was useful on the first approximation to his
motions; and since Bode’s time it has led to the discovery of fifty-five
telescopic planets revolving between the orbits of Mars and
Jupiter, some by chance, others by a systematic search on the
faith that these minute planets are fragments of a larger body
that has exploded, because their distances from the sun are nearly
the same; the lines of the nodes of some of their orbits terminate
in the same points of the heavens, and the inclinations of their
orbits are such as might have taken place from their mutual
disturbances at the time of the explosion, and while yet they
were near enough for their forms to affect their motions. The
orbits of the more recently discovered asteroids show that this
hypothesis is untenable.
The tables of Mars, Venus, and even those of the sun, have
been greatly improved, and still engage the attention of our
Astronomer Royal, Mr. Airy, and other eminent astronomers. We
are chiefly indebted to the German astronomers for tables of
the four older telescopic planets, Vesta, Juno, Ceres, and Pallas;
the others have only been discovered since the year 1845.
The determination of the path of a planet when disturbed by
all the others, a problem which has employed the talents of the
64greatest astronomers, from Newton to the present day, is only
successfully accomplished with regard to the older planets, which
revolve in nearly circular orbits, but little inclined to the plane
of the ecliptic. When the excentricity and inclination of the
orbits are great, their analysis fails, because the series expressing
the co-ordinates of the bodies become extremely complicated, and
do not converge when applied to comets and the telescopic planets.
This difficulty has been overcome by Sir John Lubbock, and other
mathematicians, who have the honour of having completed the
theory of planetary motion, which becomes every day of more
importance, from the new planets that have been discovered, and
also with regard to comets, many of which return to the sun at
regular intervals, and from whose perturbations the masses of the
planets will be more accurately determined, and the retarding
influence of the ethereal medium better known.</div></body></text></TEI>