<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="28">
257
SECTION XXVII.

Terrestrial Heat—Radiation—Transmission—Melloni’s experiments—Heat
in Solar Spectrum—Polarization of Heat—Nature of Heat—Absorptions—Dew—Rain—Combustion—Expansion—Compensation Pendulum—Transmission
through Crystals—Propagation—Dynamic
Theory of Heat—Mechanical equivalent of Heat—Latent Heat is the
Force of Expansion—Steam—Work performed by Heat—Conservation
of Force—Mechanical Power in the Tides—Dynamical Power of
Light—Analogy between Light, Heat, and Sound.
That heat producing rays exist independently of those of light
is a matter of constant experience in the abundant emission of
them from boiling water. They dart in divergent straight lines
from flame and from each point in the surfaces of hot bodies, in
the same manner as diverging rays of light proceed from every
point of those that are luminous. According to the experiments
of Sir John Leslie, radiation proceeds not only from the surface
of substances, but also from the particles at a minute depth
below it. He found that the emission is most abundant in a
direction perpendicular to the radiating surface, and that it is
more rapid from a rough than from a polished surface: radiation,
however, can only take place in air and in vacuo; it is altogether
imperceptible when the hot body is enclosed in a solid or liquid.
Heated substances, when exposed to the open air, continue to
radiate heat till they become nearly of the temperature of the
surrounding medium. The radiation is very rapid at first, but
diminishes according to a known law with the temperature of the
heated body. It appears, also, that the radiating power of a surface
is inversely as its reflecting power; and bodies that are most
impermeable to heat radiate least. Substances, however, have
an elective power, only reflecting heat of a certain refrangibility.
Mr. Grove gives paper, snow, and lime as instances, which,
although all white, radiate heat of different refrangibilities, while
metals, whatever their colour may be, radiate all kinds alike.
Rays of heat, whether they proceed from the sun, from flame,
or other terrestrial sources, luminous or non-luminous, are instantaneously
258transmitted through solid and liquid substances,
there being no appreciable difference in the time they take to
pass through layers of any nature or thickness whatever. They
pass also with the same facility whether the media be agitated or
at rest; and in these respects the analogy between light and heat
is perfect. Radiant heat passes through the gases with the same
facility as light; but a remarkable difference obtains in the
transmission of light and heat through most solid and liquid substances,
the same body being often perfectly permeable to the
luminous, and altogether impermeable to the calorific rays.
For example, thin and perfectly transparent plates of alum and
citric acid sensibly transmit all the rays of light from an argand
lamp, but stop eight or nine tenths of the concomitant heat;
whilst a large piece of brown rock-crystal gives a free passage to
the radiant heat, but intercepts almost all the light. Alum
united to green glass is also capable of transmitting the brightest
light, but it gives not the slightest indication of heat; while rock-salt
covered thickly over with soot, so as to be perfectly opaque
to light, transmits a considerable quantity of heat. M. Melloni
has established the general law in uncrystallized substances such
as glass and liquids, that the property of instantaneously transmitting
heat is in proportion to their refractive powers. The
law, however, is entirely at fault in bodies of a crystalline texture.
Carbonate of lead, for instance, which is colourless, and
possesses a very high refractive power with regard to light,
transmits less radiant heat than Iceland spar or rock-crystal,
which are very inferior to it in the order of refrangibility;
whilst rock-salt, which has the same transparency and refractive
power with alum and citric acid, transmits six or eight times as
much heat. This remarkable difference in the transmissive power
of substances having the same appearance is attributed by M.
Melloni to their crystalline form, and not to the chemical composition
of their molecules, as the following experiments prove.
A block of common salt cut into plates entirely excludes calorific
radiation; yet, when dissolved in water, it increases the transmissive
power of that liquid: moreover, the transmissive power of
water is increased in nearly the same degree, whether salt or
alum be dissolved in it; yet these two substances transmit very
different quantities of heat in their solid state. Notwithstanding
the influence of crystallization on the transmissive power of
259bodies, no relation has been traced between that power and the
crystalline form.
The transmission of radiant heat is analogous to that of light
through coloured media. When common white light passes
through a red liquid, almost all the more refrangible rays, and a
few of the red, are intercepted by the first layer of the fluid; fewer
are intercepted by the second, still less by the third, and so on:
till at last the losses become very small and invariable, and those
rays alone are transmitted which give the red colour to the liquid.
In a similar manner, when plates of the same thickness of any
substance, such as glass, are exposed to an argand lamp, a considerable
portion of the radiant heat is arrested by the first plate,
a less portion by the second, still less by the third, and so on, the
quantity of lost heat decreasing till at last the loss becomes a
constant quantity. The transmission of radiant heat through a
solid mass follows the same law. The losses are very considerable
on first entering it, but they rapidly diminish in proportion
as the heat penetrates deeper, and become constant at a certain
depth. Indeed, the only difference between the transmission of
radiant heat through a solid mass, or through the same mass
when cut into plates of equal thickness, arises from the small
quantity of heat that is reflected at the surface of the plates.
It is evident, therefore, that the heat gradually lost is not intercepted
at the surface, but absorbed in the interior of the substance,
and that heat which has passed through one stratum of
air experiences a less absorption in each of the succeeding strata,
and may therefore be propagated to a greater distance before it
is extinguished. The experiments of M. de Laroche show that
glass, however thin, totally intercepts the obscure rays of heat
when they flow from a body whose temperature is lower than
that of boiling water; that, as the temperature increases, the
calorific rays are transmitted more and more abundantly; and,
when the body becomes highly luminous, that they penetrate the
glass with perfect ease. The extreme brilliancy of the sun is
probably the reason why his heat, when brought to a focus by a
lens, is more intense than any that has been produced artificially.
It is owing to the same cause that glass screens, which
entirely exclude the heat of a common fire, are permeable by the
solar heat.
The results obtained by M. de Laroche have been confirmed
260by the experiments of M. Melloni on heat radiated from sources
of different temperatures, whence it appears that the calorific
rays pass less abundantly not only through glass, but through
rock-crystal, Iceland spar, and other diaphanous bodies, both
solid and liquid, according as the temperature of their origin
is diminished, and that they are altogether intercepted when the
temperature is about that of boiling water.
In fact, he has proved that the heat emanating from the sun
or from a bright flame consists of rays which differ from each
other as much as the coloured rays do which constitute white
light. This explains the reason of the loss of heat as it penetrates
deeper and deeper into a solid mass, or in passing through
a series of plates; for, of the different kinds of rays which
dart from a vivid flame, all are successively extinguished by
the absorbing nature of the substance through which they pass,
till those homogeneous rays alone remain which have the greatest
facility in passing through that particular substance; exactly
as in a red liquid the violet, blue, green, orange, and yellow
rays are extinguished, and the red are transmitted.
M. Melloni employed four sources of heat, two of which were
luminous and two obscure; namely, an oil-lamp without a glass,
incandescent platina, copper heated to 696°, and a copper vessel
filled with water at the temperature of
1781⁄2°
of Fahrenheit.
Rock-salt transmitted heat in the proportion of 92 rays out of
100 from each of these sources; but all other substances pervious
to radiant heat, whether solid or liquid, transmitted more heat
from sources of high temperature than from such as are low.
For instance, limpid and colourless fluate of lime transmitted in
the proportion of 78 rays out of 100 from the lamp, 69 from the
platina, 42 from the copper, and 33 from the hot water; while
transparent rock-crystal transmitted 38 rays in 100 from the
lamp, 28 from the platina, 6 from the copper, and 9 from the
hot water. Pure ice transmitted only in the proportion of 6 rays
in the 100 from the lamp, and entirely excluded those from the
other three sources. Out of 39 different substances, 34 were
pervious to the calorific rays from hot water, 14 excluded those
from the hot copper, and 4 did not transmit those from the
platinum.
Thus it appears that heat proceeding from these four sources
is of different kinds: this difference in the nature of the calorific
261rays is also proved by another experiment, which will be more
easily understood from the analogy of light. Red light, emanating
from red glass, will pass in abundance through another piece
of red glass, but it will be absorbed by green glass; green rays will
more readily pass through a green medium than through one of
any other colour. This holds with regard to all colours; so in
heat. Rays of heat of the same intensity, which have passed
through different substances, are transmitted in different quantities
by the same piece of alum, and are sometimes stopped
altogether; showing that rays which emanate from different substances
possess different qualities. It appears that a bright flame
furnishes rays of heat of all kinds, in the same manner as it
gives light of all colours; and, as coloured media transmit some
coloured rays and absorb the rest, so bodies transmit some rays of
heat and exclude the others. Rock-salt alone resembles colourless
transparent media in transmitting all kinds of heat, even
that of the hand, just as they transmit white light, consisting of
rays of all colours. Radiant heat is unequally refracted by a
prism of rock-salt like light, and the rays of heat thus dispersed
are found to possess properties analogous to the rays of the
coloured spectrum.
The property of transmitting the calorific rays diminishes to a
certain degree with the thickness of the body they have to
traverse, but not so much as might be expected. A piece of
very transparent alum transmitted three or four times less
radiant heat from the flame of a lamp than a piece of nearly
opaque quartz about a hundred times as thick. However, the
influence of thickness upon the phenomena of transmission increases
with the decrease of temperature in the origin of the rays,
and becomes very great when that temperature is low. This is
a circumstance intimately connected with the law established by
M. de Laroche; for M. Melloni observed that the difference
between the quantities of heat transmitted by the same plate of
glass, exposed successively to several sources of heat, diminished
with the thinness of the plate, and vanished altogether at a
certain limit; and that a film of mica transmitted the same
quantity of heat, whether it was exposed to incandescent platinum
or to a mass of iron heated to 360°.
Coloured glasses transmit rays of light of certain degrees of
refrangibility, and absorb those of other degrees. For example,
262red glass absorbs the more refrangible rays, and transmits the
red, which are the least refrangible. On the contrary, violet
glass absorbs the least refrangible, and transmits the violet,
which are the most refrangible. Now M. Melloni has found,
that, although the colouring matter of glass diminishes its power
of transmitting heat, yet red, orange, yellow, blue, violet, and
white glass transmit calorific rays of all degrees of refrangibility;
whereas green glass possesses the peculiar property of transmitting
the least refrangible calorific rays, and stopping those that
are most refrangible. It has therefore the same elective action
for heat that coloured glass has for light, and its action on heat
is analogous to that of red glass on light. Alum and sulphate of
lime are exactly opposed to green glass in their action on heat,
by transmitting the most refrangible rays with the greatest
facility.
The heat which has already passed through green or opaque
black glass will not pass through alum, whilst that which has
been transmitted through glasses of other colours traverses it
readily.
By reversing the experiment, and exposing different substances
to heat that had already passed through alum, M. Melloni found
that the heat emerging from alum is almost totally intercepted
by opaque substances, and is abundantly transmitted by all such
as are transparent and colourless, and that it suffers no appreciable
loss when the thickness of the plate is varied within certain
limits. The properties of the heat therefore which issues from
alum nearly approach to those of light and solar heat.
Radiant heat in traversing various media is not only rendered
more or less capable of being transmitted a second time, but,
according to the experiments of Professor Powell, it becomes
more or less susceptible of being absorbed in different quantities
by black or white surfaces.
M. Melloni has proved that solar heat contains rays which are
affected by different substances in the same way as if the heat
proceeded from a terrestrial source; whence he concludes that
the difference observed between the transmission of terrestrial
and solar heat arises from the circumstance of solar heat containing
all kinds of heat, whilst in other sources some of the
kinds are wanting.
Radiant heat, from sources of any temperature whatever, is
263subject to the same laws of reflection and refraction as rays of
light. The index of refraction from a prism of rock-salt, determined
experimentally, is nearly the same for light and heat.
Liquids, the various kinds of glass, and probably all substances,
whether solid or liquid, that do not crystallize regularly,
are more pervious to the calorific rays according as they possess
a greater refractive power. For example, the chloride of sulphur,
which has a high refractive power, transmits more of the calorific
rays than the oils, which have a less refractive power: oils
transmit more radiant heat than the acids; the acids more than
aqueous solutions; and the latter more than pure water, which
of all the series has the least refractive power, and is the least
pervious to heat. M. Melloni observed also that each ray of the
solar spectrum follows the same law of action with that of terrestrial
rays having their origin in sources of different temperatures;
so that the very refrangible rays may be compared to the
heat emanating from a focus of high temperature, and the least
refrangible to the heat which comes from a source of low temperature.
Thus, if the calorific rays emerging from a prism be
made to pass through a layer of water contained between two
plates of glass, it will be found that these rays suffer a loss in
passing through the liquid as much greater as their refrangibility
is less. The rays of heat that are mixed with the blue or violet
light pass in great abundance, while those in the obscure part
which follows the red light are almost totally intercepted. The
first, therefore, act like the heat of a lamp, and the last like that
of boiling water.
These circumstances explain the phenomena observed by
several philosophers with regard to the point of greatest heat in
the solar spectrum, which varies with the substance of the prism.
Sir William Herschel, who employed a prism of flint glass, found
that point to be a little beyond the red extremity of the spectrum;
but, according to M. Seebeck, it is found to be upon the
yellow, upon the orange, on the red, or at the dark limit of
the red, according as the prism consists of water, sulphuric acid,
crown or flint glass. If it be recollected that, in the spectrum
from crown glass, the maximum heat is in the red part, and that
the solar rays, in traversing a mass of water, suffer losses
inversely as their refrangibility, it will be easy to understand the
reason of the phenomenon in question. The solar heat which
264comes to the anterior face of the prism of water consists of rays
of all degrees of refrangibility. Now, the rays possessing the
same index of refraction with the red light suffer a greater loss
in passing through the prism than the rays possessing the
refrangibility of the orange light, and the latter lose less in their
passage than the heat of the yellow. Thus the losses, being
inversely proportional to the degree of refrangibility of each ray,
cause the point of maximum heat to tend from the red towards
the violet, and therefore it rests upon the yellow part. The
prism of sulphuric acid, acting similarly, but with less energy
than that of water, throws the point of greatest heat on the
orange; for the same reason, the crown and flint glass prisms
transfer that point respectively to the red and to its limit. M.
Melloni, observing that the maximum point of heat is transferred
farther and farther towards the red end of the spectrum, according
as the substance of the prism is more and more permeable to
heat, inferred that a prism of rock-salt, which possesses a greater
power of transmitting the calorific rays than any known body,
ought to throw the point of greatest heat to a considerable distance
beyond the visible part of the spectrum,—an anticipation
which experiment fully confirmed, by placing it as much beyond
the dark limits of the red rays as the red part is distant from the
blueish green band of the spectrum.
In all these experiments M. Melloni employed a thermomultiplier,—an
instrument that measures the intensity of the transmitted
heat with an accuracy far beyond what any thermometer
ever attained. It is a very elegant application of M. Seebeck’s
discovery of thermo-electricity; but the description of this
instrument is reserved for a future occasion, because the principle
on which it is constructed has not yet been explained.
In the beginning of the present century, not long after M.
Malus had discovered the polarization of light, he and M. Berard
proved that the heat which accompanies the sun’s light is capable
of being polarized; but their attempts totally failed with heat
derived from terrestrial, and especially from non-luminous
sources. M. Berard, indeed, imagined that he had succeeded;
but, when his experiments were repeated by Mr. Lloyd and
Professor Powell, no satisfactory result could be obtained. M.
Melloni resumed the subject, and endeavoured to effect the
polarization of heat by tourmaline, as in the case of light. It was
265already shown that two slices of tourmaline, cut parallel to the
axis of the crystal, transmit a great portion of the incident light
when looked through with their axes parallel, and almost
entirely exclude it when they are perpendicular to one another.
Should radiant heat be capable of polarization, the quantity
transmitted by the slices of tourmaline in their former position
ought greatly to exceed that which passes through them in the
latter, yet M. Melloni found that the quantity of heat was the
same in both cases: whence he inferred that heat from a terrestrial
source is incapable of being polarized. Professor Forbes of
Edinburgh, who prosecuted this subject with great acuteness
and success, came to the same conclusion in the first instance;
but it occurred to him, that, as the pieces of tourmaline became
heated by being very near the lamp, the secondary radiation
from them rendered the very small difference in the heat that
was transmitted in the two positions of the pieces of tourmaline
imperceptible. Nevertheless he succeeded in proving, by numerous
observations, that heat from various sources is polarized by
the tourmaline; but that the effect with non-luminous heat is
very minute and difficult to perceive, on account of the secondary
radiation. Though light is almost entirely excluded in one position
of the pieces of tourmaline, and transmitted in the other,
a vast quantity of radiant heat passes through them in all positions.
Eighty-four per cent. of the heat from an argand lamp
passed through them in the case where light was altogether
stopped. It is only the difference in the quantity of transmitted
heat that gives evidence of its polarization. The second slice of
tourmaline, when perpendicular to the first, stops all the light,
but transmits a great proportion of heat; alum, on the contrary,
stops almost all the heat, and transmits the light; whence it
may be concluded that heat, though intimately partaking the
nature of light, and accompanying it under certain circumstances,
as in reflection and refraction, is capable of almost complete
separation from it under others. The separation has since been
perfectly effected by M. Melloni, by passing a beam of light
through a combination of water and green glass, coloured by the
oxide of copper. Even when the transmitted light was concentrated
by lenses, so as to render it almost as brilliant as the
direct light of the sun, it showed no sensible heat.
Professor Forbes next employed two bundles of laminæ of
266mica, placed at the polarizing angle, and so cut that the plane
of incidence of the heat corresponded with one of the optic axes
of this mineral. The heat transmitted through this apparatus
was polarized from a source whose temperature was even as low
as 200°; heat was also polarized by reflection; but the experiments,
though perfectly successful, are more difficult to
conduct.
It appears, from the various experiments of M. Melloni and
Professor Forbes, that all the calorific rays emanating from the
sun and terrestrial sources are equally capable of being polarized
by reflection and by refraction, whether double or single, and
that they are also capable of circular polarization by all the
methods employed in the circular polarization of light. Plates
of quartz cut at right angles to the axis of the prism possess the
property of turning the calorific rays in one direction, while other
plates of the same substance from a differently modified prism
cause the rays to rotate in the contrary direction; and two plates
combined, when of different affection, and of equal thickness,
counteract each other’s effects as in the case of light. Tourmaline
separates the heat into two parts, one of which it absorbs,
while it transmits the other; in short, the transmission of radiant
heat is precisely similar to that of light.
Since heat is polarized in the same manner as light, it may be
expected that polarized heat transmitted through doubly refracting
substances should be separated into two pencils, polarized in
planes at right angles to each other; and that when received on
an analyzing plate they should interfere and produce invisible
phenomena, perfectly analogous to those described in
Section XXII. with regard to light (N. 221).
It was shown, in the same section, that if light polarized by
reflection from a pane of glass be viewed through a plate of tourmaline,
with its longitudinal section vertical, an obscure cloud,
with its centre wholly dark, is seen on the glass. When, however,
a plate of mica uniformly about the thirteenth of an inch
in thickness is interposed between the tourmaline and the glass,
the dark spot vanishes, and a succession of very splendid colours
are seen; and, as the mica is turned round in a plane perpendicular
to the polarized ray, the light is stopped when the plane
containing the optic axis of the mica is parallel or perpendicular
to the plane of polarization. Now, instead of light, if heat from
267a non-luminous source be polarized in the manner described, it
ought to be transmitted and stopped by the interposed mica
under the same circumstances under which polarized light would
be transmitted or stopped. Professor Forbes found that this is
really the case, whether he employed heat from luminous or non-luminous
sources: and he had evidence, also, of circular and
elliptical polarization of heat. It therefore follows, that if heat
were visible, under similar circumstances we should see figures
perfectly similar to those given in Note 213, and those following;
and, as these figures are formed by the interference of undulations
of light, it may be inferred that heat, like light, is propagated
by undulations of the ethereal medium, which interfere under
certain conditions, and produce figures analogous to those of
light. It appears also, from Mr. Forbes’s experiments, that the
undulations of heat are longer than the undulations of light; and
it has already been mentioned that Professor Draper considers
them to be normal, like those of sound.
That light and heat are both vibrations of the ethereal medium
is not the less true on account of the rays of heat being unseen,
for the condition of visibility or invisibility may only depend
upon the construction of our eyes, and not upon the nature of
the motion which produces these sensations in us. The sense of
seeing may be confined within certain limits. The chemical
rays beyond the violet end of the spectrum may be too rapid, or
not sufficiently excursive, in their vibrations, to be visible to the
human eye; and the calorific rays beyond the other end of the
spectrum may not be sufficiently rapid, or too extensive, in their
undulations, to affect our optic nerves, though both may be
visible to certain animals or insects. We are altogether ignorant
of the perceptions which direct the carrier-pigeon to his home,
or of those in the antennæ of insects which warn them of the
approach of danger; nor can we understand the telescopic vision
which directs the vulture to his prey before he himself is visible
even as a speck in the heavens. So, likewise, beings may
exist on earth, in the air, or in the waters, which hear sounds
our ears are incapable of hearing, and which see rays of light
and heat of which we are unconscious. Our perceptions and
faculties are limited to a very small portion of that immense
chain of existence which extends from the Creator to evanescence.
The identity of action under similar circumstances is one of
268the strongest arguments in favour of the common nature of the
chemical, visible, and calorific rays. They are all capable of
reflection from polished surfaces, of refraction through diaphanous
substances, of polarization by reflection and by doubly refracting
crystals; their velocity is prodigious; they may be concentrated
and dispersed by convex and concave mirrors; they pass with
equal facility through rock-salt and are capable of radiation; and
they are subject to the same law of interference with those of
light: hence there can be no doubt that the whole assemblage of
rays visible and invisible which constitute a solar beam are propagated
by the undulations of the ethereal medium, and consequently
as motions they come under the same laws of analysis.
When radiant heat falls upon a surface, part of it is reflected
and part of it is absorbed; consequently, the best reflectors
possess the least absorbing powers. The temperature of very
transparent fluids is not raised by the passage of the sun’s rays,
because they do not absorb any of them; and, as his heat is very
intense, transparent solids arrest a very small portion of it. The
absorption of the sun’s rays is the cause both of the colour and
temperature of solid bodies. A black substance absorbs all the
rays of light, and reflects none; and since it absorbs, at the same
time, all the calorific rays, it becomes sooner warm, and rises to
a higher temperature, than bodies of any other colour. Blue
bodies come next to black in their power of absorption. And,
since substances of a blue tint absorb all the other colours of the
spectrum, they absorb by far the greatest part of the calorific
rays, and reflect the blue where they are least abundant. Next
in order come the green, yellow, red, and, last of all, white bodies,
which reflect nearly all the rays both of light and heat. However,
there are certain limpid and colourless media, which in
some cases intercept calorific radiations and become heated, while
in other cases they transmit them and undergo no change of
temperature.
All substances may be considered to radiate heat, whatever
their temperature may be, though with different intensities,
according to their nature, the state of their surfaces, and the
temperature of the medium into which they are brought. But
every surface absorbs as well as radiates heat; and the power of
absorption is always equal to that of radiation; for, under the
same circumstances, matter which becomes soon warm also cools
269rapidly. There is a constant tendency to an equal diffusion of
heat, since every body in nature is giving and receiving it at the
same instant; each will be of uniform temperature when the
quantities of heat given and received during the same time are
equal—that is, when a perfect compensation takes place between
each and all the rest. Our sensations only measure comparative
degrees of heat: when a body, such as ice, appears to be cold, it
imparts fewer calorific rays than it receives; and when a substance
seems to be warm—for example, a fire—it gives more
heat than it takes. The phenomena of dew and hoar-frost are
owing to this inequality of exchange; the heat radiated during
the night by substances on the surface of the earth, into a clear
expanse of sky, is lost to us, and no return is made from the blue
vault, so that their temperature sinks below that of the air,
whence they abstract a part of that heat which holds the atmospheric
humidity in solution, and a deposition of dew takes place.
If the radiation be great, the dew is frozen and becomes hoar-frost,
which is the ice of dew. Cloudy weather is unfavourable
to the formation of dew, by preventing the free radiation of heat;
and actual contact is requisite for its deposition, since it is never
suspended in the air like fog. Plants derive a great part of their
nourishment from this source; and, as each possesses a power of
radiation peculiar to itself, they are capable of procuring a sufficient
supply for their wants. The action of the chemical rays
imparts to all substances more or less the power of condensing
vapour on those parts on which they fall, and must therefore
have a considerable influence on the deposition of dew. There
may be a low degree of humidity in the air which may yet
contain a great quantity of aqueous vapour, for vapour while it
exists as gas is dry. The temperature at which the atmosphere
can contain no more vapour without precipitation is called the
dew point, and is measured by the hygrometer. In foretelling
the changes of weather it is scarcely inferior to the barometer.
Steam is formed throughout the whole mass of a boiling
liquid, whereas evaporation takes place only at the free surface
of liquids, and that under the ordinary temperature and pressure
of the atmosphere. There is a constant evaporation from the
land and water all over the earth. The rapidity of the formation
does not depend altogether on the dryness of the air; according
to Dr. Dalton’s experiments, it depends also on the difference
270between the tension of the vapour which is forming, and that
which is already in the atmosphere. In calm weather vapour
accumulates in the stratum of air immediately above the evaporating
surface, and retards the formation of more; whereas a
strong wind accelerates the process by carrying off the vapour as
soon as it rises, and making way for a succeeding portion of dry
air.
Rain is formed by the mixing of two masses of air of different
temperatures; the colder part, by abstracting from the other
the heat which holds it in solution, occasions the particles to
approach each other and form drops of water, which, becoming
too heavy to be sustained by the atmosphere, sink to the earth
by gravitation in the form of rain. The contact of two strata
of air of different temperatures, moving rapidly in opposite
directions, occasions an abundant precipitation of rain. When
the masses of air differ very much in temperature, and meet
suddenly, hail is formed. This happens frequently in hot plains
near a ridge of mountains, as in the south of France, from the
sudden descent of an intensely cold current of wind into a mass
of air nearly saturated with vapour. Such also is the cause of
the severe hail-storms which occasionally take place on extensive
plains within the tropics.
An accumulation of heat invariably produces light: with the
exception of the gases, all bodies which can endure the requisite
degree of heat without decomposition begin to emit light at the
same temperature; but, when the quantity of heat is so great
as to render the affinity of their component particles less than
their affinity for the oxygen of the atmosphere, a chemical combination
takes place with the oxygen, light and heat are evolved,
and fire is produced. Combustion—so essential for our comfort,
and even existence—takes place very easily from the small
affinity between the component parts of atmospheric air, the
oxygen being nearly in a free state; but, as the cohesive force
of the particles of different substances is very variable, different
degrees of heat are requisite to produce their combustion. The
tendency of heat to a state of equal diffusion or equilibrium,
either by radiation or contact, makes it necessary that the
chemical combination which occasions combustion should take
place instantaneously; for, if the heat were developed progressively,
it would be dissipated by degrees, and would never
271accumulate sufficiently to produce a temperature high enough
for the evolution of flame.
It is a general law that all bodies expand by heat and contract
by cold. The expansive force of heat has a constant
tendency to overcome the attraction of cohesion, and to separate
the constituent particles of solids and fluids; by this separation
the attraction of aggregation is more and more weakened, till at
last it is entirely overcome, or even changed into repulsion. By
the continual addition of heat, solids may be made to pass into
liquids, and from liquids to the aëriform state, the dilatation
increasing with the temperature; and every substance expands
according to a law of its own. Gases expand more than liquids,
and liquids more than solids. The expansion of air is more
than eight times that of water, and the increase in the bulk of
water is at least forty-five times greater than that of iron.
Metals dilate uniformly from the freezing to the boiling points
of the thermometer; the uniform expansion of the gases extends
between still wider limits; but, as liquidity is a state of transition
from the solid to the aëriform condition, the equable dilatation
of liquids has not so extensive a range. This change of
bulk, corresponding to the variation of heat, is one of the most
important of its effects, since it furnishes the means of measuring
relative temperature by the thermometer and pyrometer. The
rate of expansion of solids varies at their transition to liquidity,
and that of liquidity is no longer equable near their change to
an aëriform state. There are exceptions, however, to the general
laws of expansion; some liquids have a maximum density corresponding
to a certain temperature, and dilate whether that
temperature be increased or diminished. For example—water
expands whether it be heated above or cooled below 40°. The
solidification of some liquids, and especially their crystallization,
is always accompanied by an increase of bulk. Water dilates
rapidly when converted into ice, and with a force sufficient to
split the hardest substances. The formation of ice is therefore
a powerful agent in the disintegration and decomposition of
rocks, operating as one of the most efficient causes of local
changes in the structure of the crust of the earth; of which we
have experience in the tremendous éboulemens of mountains in
Switzerland. But Professor W. Thomson has proved experimentally
that it requires a lower temperature to freeze water
under pressure than when free.
272The dilatation of substances by heat, and their contraction
by cold, occasion such irregularities in the rate of clocks and
watches as would render them unfit for astronomical or nautical
purposes, were it not for a very beautiful application of the
laws of unequal expansion. The oscillations of a pendulum are
the same as if its whole mass were united in one dense particle,
in a certain point of its length, called the centre of oscillation.
If the distance of this point from the point by which the
pendulum is suspended were invariable, the rate of the clock
would be invariable also. The difficulty is to neutralize the
effects of temperature, which is perpetually increasing or diminishing
its length. Among many contrivances, Graham’s compensation
pendulum is the most simple. He employed a glass
tube containing mercury. When the tube expands from the
effects of heat, the mercury expands much more; so that its
surface rises a little more than the end of the pendulum is
depressed, and the centre of oscillation remains stationary.
Harrison invented a pendulum which consists of seven bars of
steel and of brass, joined in the shape of a gridiron, in such a
manner that, if by change of temperature the bars of brass raise
the weight at the end of the pendulum, the bars of steel depress
it as much. In general, only five bars are used; three being of
steel, and two a mixture of silver and zinc. The effects of
temperature are neutralized in chronometers upon the same
principle; and to such perfection are they brought, that the
loss or gain of one second in twenty-four hours for two days
running would render one unfit for use. Accuracy in surveying
depends upon the compensation rods employed in measuring
bases. Thus, the laws of the unequal expansion of matter judiciously
applied have an immediate influence upon our estimation
of time; of the motions of bodies in the heavens, and of
their fall upon the earth; on our determination of the figure of
the globe, and on our system of weights and measures; on our
commerce abroad, and the mensuration of our lands at home.
The expansion of the crystalline substances takes place under
very different circumstances from the dilatation of such as are
not crystallized. The latter become both longer and thicker by
an accession of heat, whereas M. Mitscherlich has found that the
former expand differently in different directions; and, in a particular
instance, extension in one direction is accompanied by
contraction in another: for example, Iceland spar is dilated
273in the direction of its axis of double refraction (N. 205), but
at right angles to that axis it is contracted, which brings
the crystal nearer to the form of the cube and diminishes its
double refractive power. When heat is applied to crystals of
sulphate of lime, the two optical axes (N. 207) gradually approach,
and at last coincide; when the heat is increased, the axes open
again, but in a direction at right angles to their former position.
By experiment M. Senarmont has concluded, that in media constituted
like crystals of the rhomboidal (N. 169) system the
conducting power varies in such a manner, that, supposing a
centre of heat to exist within them, and the medium to be indefinitely
extended in all directions, the isothermal surfaces are
concentric ellipsoids of revolution round the axes of symmetry,
or at least surfaces differing but little from them. The internal
structure of crystallized matter must be very peculiar thus to
modify the expansive power of heat.
Heat applied to the surface of a fluid is propagated downwards
very slowly, the warmer, and consequently lighter strata, always
remaining at the top. This is the reason why the water at the
bottom of lakes fed from Alpine chains is so cold; for the heat
of the sun is transfused but a little way below the surface.
When the heat is applied below a liquid, the particles continually
rise as they become specifically lighter, and diffuse the
heat through the mass, their place being perpetually supplied by
those that are more dense. The power of conducting heat varies
materially in different liquids. Mercury conducts twice as fast
as an equal bulk of water, and therefore it appears to be very
cold. A hot body diffuses its heat in the air by a double
process: the air in contact with it becoming lighter ascends and
scatters its heat by transmission, while at the same time
another portion is discharged in straight lines by the radiating
power of the surface. Hence a substance cools more rapidly
in air than in vacuo, because in the latter case the process is
carried on by radiation alone. It is probable that the earth
having been originally of very high temperature has become
cooler by radiation alone, the ethereal medium being too rare to
carry off much heat by contact.
Heat is propagated with more or less rapidity through all
bodies; air is the worst conductor, and consequently mitigates
the severity of cold climates by preserving the heat imparted
274to the earth by the sun. On the contrary, dense bodies,
especially metals, possess the power of conduction in the
greatest degree, but the transmission requires time. If a bar of
iron twenty inches long be heated at one extremity, the heat
takes four minutes in passing to the other. The particle of
the metal that is first heated communicates the heat to the
second, and the second to the third: so that the temperature of
the intermediate molecule at any instant is increased by the
excess of the temperature of the first above its own, and
diminished by the excess of its own temperature above that of
the third. That however will not be the temperature indicated
by the thermometer, because as soon as the particle is more
heated than the surrounding atmosphere it loses its heat by
radiation, in proportion to the excess of its actual temperature
above that of the air. The velocity of the discharge is directly
proportional to the temperature, and inversely as the length of
the bar. As there are perpetual variations in the temperature
of all terrestrial substances, and of the atmosphere, from the
rotation of the earth, and its revolution round the sun, from
combustion, friction, fermentation, electricity, and an infinity
of other causes, the tendency to restore the equability of
temperature by the transmission of heat must maintain all the
particles of matter in a state of perpetual oscillation, which
will be more or less rapid according to the conducting powers of
the substances. From the motion of the heavenly bodies about
their axes, and also round the sun, exposing them to perpetual
changes of temperature, it may be inferred that similar causes
will produce like effects in them too. The revolutions of the
double stars show that they are not at rest; and although we
are totally ignorant of the changes that may be going on in the
nebulæ and millions of other remote bodies, it is hardly possible
that they should be in absolute repose; so that, as far as our
knowledge extends, motion is a law of the universe and the
immediate cause of heat, as in the sunbeam so also in all
terrestrial phenomena.
This is by no means hypothetical, but founded upon fact and
experiment. Heat is produced by motion and is equivalent to it,
for we measure heat by motion in the thermometer. The heat
evolved by percussion is proportional to the force of the blow;
by repeated blows iron becomes red hot; and the quantity of
275heat produced by friction, whether the matter be solid or fluid,
is always in proportion to the force employed: in cold weather
we rub our hands to make them warm, and the harder we rub
the warmer they become. The warmth of the sea after a storm
is in proportion to the force of the wind; and in Sir Humphry
Davy’s experiment of melting ice by friction in the receiver of
an air-pump kept at the freezing point, the heat which melted
the ice was exactly proportional to the force of friction. This
experiment proves the immateriality of heat, since the capacity
of ice for heat is less than that of water. Thus mechanical
action and heat are equivalent to one another. Mr. Joule of
Manchester[13] has proved that the quantity of heat requisite to
raise the temperature of a pound of water one degree of Fahrenheit’s
thermometer, is equivalent to the mechanical force developed
by the fall of a body weighing 772·69 pounds through
the perpendicular height of one foot. This quantity is the
mechanical equivalent of heat. Thus heat is motion, and it is
measured by force. In fact, for every unit of force expended in
friction or percussion, a definite quantity of heat is generated;
and conversely, when work is performed by the consumption of
heat, for each unit of force gained, a unit of heat disappears. For
since heat is a dynamical force of mechanical effect, there must
be an equivalent between mechanical work and heat as between
cause and effect. (N. 222.)
Besides the temperature indicated by the thermometer, bodies
absorb heat, and their capacity for heat is so various that
very different quantities of heat are required to raise different
substances to the same sensible temperature. It is evident,
therefore, that much of the heat is absorbed and becomes
insensible to the thermometer. That portion of heat requisite
to raise a body to a given temperature is its specific heat,
but the latent or absorbed heat is an expansive force or
energy, which, acting upon the ether surrounding the ultimate
particles of bodies, changes them from solid to liquid, and from
liquid to vapour or gas. According to the law of absorption,
the transfer of heat from a warm body to one that is cold is a
276mere transfer of force, in which the force of compression is
exactly proportional to the force of expansion. Ice remains at
the temperature of 32° Fahrenheit till it has absorbed 140° of
heat, and then it melts, but without raising the temperature of
the water above 32°. On the contrary, when a liquid is converted
into a solid, a quantity of heat leaves it without any
diminution of temperature. Thus water at 32° must part with
140° of heat before it freezes. The slowness with which water
freezes or ice thaws, is a consequence of the time required for
the ethereal atmospheres round the particles of the water to
contract or expand with a force equivalent to 140° of heat. A
considerable degree of cold is felt during a thaw, because the
ice in its transition from a solid to a liquid state absorbs
sensible heat from the atmosphere and surrounding objects. The
heat absorbed and evolved by the rarefaction and condensation
of air is exactly proportional to the force evolved and absorbed
in these operations. In fact, the changes of temperature produced
by these rarefactions and condensations of air show that
the heat of elastic fluids is the mechanical force possessed by
them; and since the temperature of a gas determines its elastic
force, it follows that the elastic force or pressure must be the
effect of the motion of the constituent particles in any gas.
Sir Humphry Davy, who first demonstrated the immateriality of
heat, assumed the hypothesis that the motion we call heat is a
rotation or vibration among the particles of the fluid, which, according
to Mr. Joule, agrees perfectly with the observed phenomena,
but he prefers the more simple view of Mr. Herapath, that
the elastic force or pressure is due to the impact of the particles
against any surface presented to them. Absorbed or latent heat
may be regarded as a quiescent energy ready to be restored to the
form of sensible heat when called forth: its vibrations as heat
are extinguished for the time by being transferred to the internal
expansive force, and are restored by compression. The absorbed
heat of air and all elastic fluids may be forced out by sudden
compression like squeezing water out of a sponge. The quantity
of heat brought into action in this way is well illustrated by the
experiment of igniting tinder by the sudden compression of air
by a piston thrust into a cylinder closed at one end. The
development of heat on a stupendous scale is exhibited in
lightning: it is proportional to the square of the quantity
277of electricity discharged, and is due to its excessive velocity
and the violent compression of the air in its transit through
the atmosphere. Prodigious quantities of heat are constantly
absorbed or disengaged by the changes to which substances are
liable in passing from the solid to the liquid and from the
liquid to the gaseous form and the contrary, causing endless
vicissitudes of temperature over the globe, and endless expansions
and contractions, which are correlative terms for heat
and cold, while radiation of heat is merely a transfer of motion
from the particles on the surface of bodies to the adjacent
particles of the atmosphere.
By the continual application of heat, that is of the expansive
force, liquids are converted into steam or vapour, which is
invisible and highly elastic. Under the mean pressure of the
atmosphere, that is when the barometer stands at 30 inches,
water in a boiler absorbs heat continually till it attains the
temperature of the boiling point, which is 212° Fahrenheit.
After that it ceases to show any increase of sensible heat; but
when it has absorbed an additional 1000° of heat or expansive
energy, that energy converts it into steam, and a condensing
force equivalent to 1000° of heat reduces it again to water.
Water boils at different temperatures under different degrees of
pressure. It boils at a lower temperature on the top of a
mountain than on the plain below, because the weight of the
atmosphere is less at the higher station. There is no limit to
the temperature to which water might be raised: it might even
be made red hot, could a vessel be found strong enough to resist
the pressure, for the intensity of the expansive force prevented
from having effect by the extreme pressure of the boiler would
be converted into sensible heat which might eventually render
the water red hot. Thus, since the force of steam is in proportion
to the temperature at which the water boils, or to the
pressure, it is under control, and, perhaps with the exception of
electricity, it is the greatest power that has been made subservient
to the wants of man.
It is found that the absolute quantity of heat consumed in
the process of converting water into steam is the same at
whatever temperature water may boil, but that the absolute heat
of the steam is greater exactly in proportion as its sensible heat
is less. Thus, steam raised at 212° Fahrenheit under the mean
278pressure of the atmosphere, and steam raised at 180° under half
the pressure, contain the same quantity of heat, with this
difference, that the one has more absorbed heat and less sensible
heat than the other. It is evident that, as the same quantity of
heat is requisite for converting a given weight of water into
steam, at whatever temperature or under whatever pressure the
water may be boiled, therefore, in the steam engine, equal
weights of steam at a high pressure and a low pressure are produced
by the same quantity of fuel; and whatever the pressure
of the steam may be, the consumption of fuel is proportional to
the quantity of water converted into vapour. Steam of whatever
tension expands on being set free, but the expansion of high
pressure steam at the expense of its sensible heat is so great,
that the hand may be plunged into it without injury the instant
it issues from the orifice of a boiler. The steam becomes hotter
by friction in issuing through the orifice which maintains it in its
dry form, for there is no doubt that high-pressure steam is dry.
The elasticity or tension of steam, like that of common air,
varies inversely as its volume—that is, when the space it occupies
is doubled, its elastic force is reduced to one half. The
expansion of steam is indefinite; the smallest quantity of water
expanded into vapour will occupy many millions of cubic feet;
a wonderful illustration of the minuteness of the ultimate particles
of matter.
The force of steam, tremendous as the lightning itself when
uncontrolled, is merely the result of chemical affinity: it is the
chemical attraction between the particles of carbon, of coal or
wood, and the oxygen of the atmosphere. Mr. Joule has ascertained
that a pound of the best coal when burnt gives sufficient
heat to raise the temperature of 8086 pounds of water one degree
of the Centigrade thermometer, whence it has been computed by
M. Helmholtz that the chemical force arising from the combustion
of that pound of coal is capable of lifting a body of one
hundred pounds weight to the height of twenty miles. That is
the work performed by the heat arising from the combustion of
a pound of coal. In all cases where work is produced by heat, a
quantity of heat proportional to the work done is expended; and
conversely, by the expenditure of a like quantity of work, the
same amount of heat may be produced. The equivalence of heat
and work is a law of nature. The mechanical force exerted by
279the steam engine for example is exactly proportional to the consumption
of heat, nor more nor less; if we could produce a greater
quantity than its equivalent we should have perpetual motion,
which is impossible. Mechanical engines generate no force. We
cannot create force; we can only avail ourselves of the inexhaustible
stores of nature, the lightning, fire, water, wind, chemical
action, &c. The quantity of mechanical power in nature is ever
the same; it is never increased, it is never diminished, throughout
the whole circuit of natural powers. The conservation of force
is as permanent and unchangeable as matter. It may be dormant
for a time, but it ever exists. We are unconscious of the enormous
dynamic power that is either active or latent throughout
the globe, because we do not attend to it. By the ebb and flow
of the tide alone a power is exerted by which 25,000 cubic miles
of water is moved over a quarter of the globe every twelve hours;
and Professor W. Thomson has computed, by means of Pouillet’s
data of solar radiation and Mr. Joule’s mechanical equivalent of
heat, that the mechanical value of the whole energy active and
potential of the disturbances kept up in the ethereal medium by
the vibrations of the solar light within a cubic mile of our atmosphere
is equal to 12,050 times the unit of mechanical force, that
is to say, 12,050 times the force that would raise a pound of
matter to the height of one foot, whence some idea may be formed
of the vast amount of force exerted by the sun’s light within the
limits of the whole terrestrial atmosphere. (N. 223.)
The dynamic energy of the undulations of the solar light gives
the leaves of plants the power of decomposing carbonic acid, and
of separating the particles of carbon and hydrogen from the
oxygen for which they have so strong an affinity. In this operation
the undulations of the sunbeam are extinguished as light and heat,
and Professor W. Thomson has proved that the quantity of these
undulations thus extinguished is precisely equal to the potential
or quiescent energy thus created, and that precisely that very
quantity of light and heat is restored when the plants are burned,
whatever state they may be in; and that thus, as Mr. George
Stephenson[14] has truly and beautifully observed, our coal fires
280and gas lamps restore to our use the light and heat of the sun of
the early geological epochs which have rested as dormant powers
under the seas and mountains for unnumbered ages. The sun
is therefore the source of the mechanical energy of all the heat
and motion of inanimate things, of all the motions of the heat
and light of fires and artificial flames, and of the heat of all
living creatures. For animal heat, and weights raised or resistance
overcome, are mechanical effects of the chemical combination
of food with oxygen; and food is either directly or
indirectly vegetable, consequently dependent upon the sun.
Professor Helmholtz of Bonn has put in a strong point of view
the enormous store of force possessed by our system by comparing
it with its equivalent of heat. The force with which the
earth moves in its orbit is such, that if brought to rest by a
sudden shock, a quantity of heat would be generated by the blow
equal to that produced by the combustion of fourteen such earths
of solid coal; and supposing the capacity of the earth for heat as
low as that of water, the globe would be heated to 11,200° Cent.
It would be quite fused and for the most part reduced to vapour.
If it should fall to the sun, which it would certainly do, the
quantity of heat developed by the shock would be four hundred
times as great.
The application of heat to the various branches of the mechanical
and chemical arts has within the present century effected a
greater change in the condition of man than had been accomplished
in any equal period of his existence. Armed by the expansion
and condensation of fluids with a power equal to that of the
lightning itself, conquering time and space, he flies over plains,
and travels on paths cut by human industry even through mountains
with a velocity and smoothness more like planetary than
terrestrial motion; he crosses the deep in opposition to wind
and tide; by releasing the strain on the cable, he rides at
anchor fearless of the storm; he makes the lightning his messenger;
and like a magician he raises from the gloomy abyss of
the mine the sunbeam of former ages to dispel the midnight
darkness.
The principal phenomena of heat may be illustrated by a
comparison with those of sound. Their excitation is not only
similar but identical, as in friction and percussion; they are both
communicated by contact and radiation; and Dr. Young observes
that the effect of radiant heat in raising the temperature of a
281body upon which it falls, resembles the sympathetic agitation of
a string when the sound of another string which is in unison with
it is transmitted through the air. Light, heat, sound, and the
waves of fluids are all subject to the same laws; their undulatory
theories are perfectly similar: hence the interference of two
hot rays must produce cold, that is, they must extinguish one
another: darkness results from the interference of two undulations
of light, silence ensues from the interference of two undulations
of sound, and still water or no tide is the consequence
of the interference of two tides. The propagation of sound,
however, requires a much denser medium than that of light and
heat; its intensity diminishes as the rarity of the air increases:
so that, at a very small height above the surface of the earth,
the noise of the tempest ceases, and the thunder is heard no
more in those boundless regions where the heavenly bodies
accomplish their periods in eternal and sublime silence.
A consciousness of the fallacy of our senses is one of the most
important consequences of the study of nature. This study
teaches us that no object is seen by us in its true place, owing to
aberration; that the colours of substances are solely the effects of
the action of matter upon light; and that light itself as well as
heat and sound are not real beings, but mere motions communicated
to our perceptions by the nerves. The human frame may
therefore be regarded as an elastic system, the different parts of
which are capable of receiving the tremors of elastic media, and
of vibrating in unison with any number of superimposed undulations,
all of which have their perfect and independent effect.
Here our knowledge ends: the mysterious influence of matter on
mind will in all probability be for ever hid from man.</div></body></text></TEI>