<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="21">
167
SECTION XX.

Interference of Light—Undulatory Theory of Light—Propagation of
Light—Newton’s Rings—Measurement of the Length of the Waves of
Light, and of the Frequency of the Vibrations of Ether for each Colour—Newton’s
Scale of Colours—Diffraction of Light—Sir John Herschel’s
Theory of the Absorption of Light—Refraction and Reflection of
Light.
Newton and most of his immediate successors imagined light
to be a material substance, emitted by all self-luminous bodies
in extremely minute particles, moving in straight lines with prodigious
velocity, which, by impinging upon the optic nerves,
produce the sensation of light. Many of the observed phenomena
have been explained by this theory; it is, however, totally
inadequate to account for the following circumstances.
When two equal rays of red light, proceeding from two luminous
points, fall upon a sheet of white paper in a dark room,
they produce a red spot on it which will be twice as bright as
either ray would produce singly, provided the difference in the
lengths of the two beams, from the luminous points to the red
spot on the paper, be exactly the 0·0000258th part of an inch.
The same effect will take place if the difference in the lengths
be twice, three times, four times, &c., that quantity. But
if the difference in the lengths of the two rays be equal
to one-half of the 0·0000258th part of an inch, or to its
11⁄2,
21⁄2,
31⁄2,
&c., part, the one light will entirely extinguish
the other, and will produce absolute darkness on the paper
where the united beams fall. If the difference in the
lengths of their paths be equal to the
11⁄4,
21⁄4,
31⁄4,
&c., of the
0·0000258th part of an inch, the red spot arising from the combined
beams will be of the same intensity which one alone would
produce. If violet light be employed, the difference in the
lengths of the two beams must be equal to the 0·0000157th
part of an inch, in order to produce the same phenomena; and
for the other colours, the difference must be intermediate between
the 0·0000258th and the 0·0000157th part of an inch.
168Similar phenomena may be seen by viewing the flame of a
candle through two very fine slits in a card extremely near to
one another (N. 198); or by admitting the sun’s light into a
dark room through a pin-hole about the fortieth of an inch in
diameter, receiving the image on a sheet of white paper, and
holding a slender wire in the light. Its shadow will be found
to consist of a bright white bar or stripe in the middle, with a
series of alternate black and brightly-coloured stripes on each
side. The rays which bend round the wire in two streams are
of equal lengths in the middle stripe; it is consequently doubly
bright from their combined effect; but the rays which fall on
the paper on each side of the bright stripe, being of such unequal
lengths as to destroy one another, form black lines. On each
side of these black lines the rays are again of such lengths as to
combine to form bright stripes, and so on alternately till the
light is too faint to be visible. When any homogeneous light is
used, such as red, the alternations are only black and red; but
on account of the heterogeneous nature of white light, the black
lines alternate with vivid stripes or fringes of prismatic colours,
arising from the superposition of systems of alternate black lines
and lines of each homogeneous colour. That the alternation of
black lines and coloured fringes actually does arise from the
mixture of the two streams of light which flow round the wire,
is proved by their vanishing the instant one of the streams is
interrupted. It may therefore be concluded, as often as these
stripes of light and darkness occur, that they are owing to the
rays combining at certain intervals to produce a joint effect, and
at others to extinguish one another. Now it is contrary to all
our ideas of matter to suppose that two particles of it should
annihilate one another under any circumstances whatever; while,
on the contrary, two opposing motions may; and it is impossible
not to be struck with the perfect similarity between the
interferences of small undulations of air or of water and the preceding
phenomena. The analogy is indeed so perfect, that
philosophers of the highest authority concur in the belief that
the celestial regions are filled with an extremely rare and highly
elastic medium or ether, whose particles are capable of receiving
the vibrations communicated to them by self-luminous bodies,
and of transmitting them to the optic nerves, so as to produce
the sensation of light. The acceleration in the mean motion of
169Encke’s comet, as well as of the comet discovered by M. Biela,
renders the existence of such a medium certain. It is clear
that, in this hypothesis, the alternate stripes of light and darkness
are entirely the effect of the interference of the undulations;
for, by actual measurement, the length of a wave of the mean
red rays of the solar spectrum is equal to the 0·0000258th part
of an inch; consequently, when the elevations of the waves
combine, they produce double the intensity of light that each
would do singly; and when half a wave combines with a whole—that
is, when the hollow of one wave is filled up by the elevation
of another—darkness is the result. At intermediate
points between these extremes, the intensity of the light corresponds
to intermediate differences in the lengths of the rays.
The theory of interferences is a particular case of the general
mechanical law of the superposition of small motions; whence it
appears that the disturbance of a particle of an elastic medium,
produced by two co-existent undulations, is the sum of the disturbances
which each undulation would produce separately;
consequently, the particle will move in the diagonal of a parallelogram,
whose sides are the two undulations. If, therefore,
the two undulations agree in direction, or nearly so, the resulting
motion will be very nearly equal to their sum, and in the same
direction; if they nearly oppose one another, the resulting motion
will be nearly equal to their difference; and, if the undulations
be equal and opposite, the resultant will be zero, and the particle
will remain at rest.
The preceding experiments, and the inferences deduced from
them, which have led to the establishment of the doctrine of the
undulations of light, are the most splendid memorials of our
illustrious countryman Dr. Thomas Young, though Huygens
was the first to originate the idea.
It is supposed that the particles of luminous bodies are in a
state of perpetual agitation, and that they possess the property
of exciting regular vibrations in the molecules of the ethereal
medium, corresponding to the vibrations of their own molecules;
and that, on account of its elastic nature, one particle of the
ether when set in motion communicates its vibrations to those
adjacent, which in succession transmit them to those farther off;
so that the primitive impulse is transferred from particle to particle,
and the undulating motion darts through ether like a wave
170in water; so that light is motion, and therefore subject to the
laws of dynamics and mathematical analysis. Although the
progressive motion of light is known by experience to be uniform
and in a straight line, the vibrations of the particles are always
at right angles to the direction of the ray. The propagation of
light is like the spreading of waves in water; but, if one ray
alone be considered, its motion may be conceived by supposing a
rope of indefinite length stretched horizontally, one end of which
is held in the hand. If it be agitated to and fro at regular
intervals, with a motion perpendicular to its length, a series of
similar and equal tremors or waves will be propagated along it;
and if the regular impulses be given in a variety of planes, as up
and down, from right to left, and also in oblique directions, the
successive undulations will take place in every possible plane.
An analogous motion in the ether, when communicated to the
optic nerves, would produce the sensation of common light. It
is evident that the waves which flow from end to end of the cord
in a serpentine form are altogether different from the perpendicular
vibratory motion of each particle of the rope, which never
deviates far from a state of rest. So, in ether, each particle
vibrates perpendicularly to the direction of the ray; but these
vibrations are totally different from and independent of the undulations
which are transmitted through it, in the same manner
as the vibrations of each particular ear of corn are independent of
the waves that rush from end to end of a harvest-field when
agitated by the wind.
The intensity of light depends upon the amplitude or extent
of the vibrations of the particles of ether, while its colour depends
upon their frequency. The time of the vibration of a particle of
ether is, by theory, as the length of a wave directly, and inversely
as its velocity. Now, as the velocity of light is known
to be 190,000 miles in a second, if the lengths of the waves of
the different coloured rays could be measured, the number of
vibrations in a second corresponding to each could be computed.
That has been accomplished as follows:—All transparent substances
of a certain thickness, with parallel surfaces, reflect and
transmit white light; but, if they be extremely thin, both the
reflected and transmitted light is coloured. The vivid hues on
soap-bubbles, the iridescent colours produced by heat on polished
steel and copper, the fringes of colour between the laminæ of
171Iceland spar and sulphate of lime, all consist of a succession of
hues disposed in the same order, totally independent of the
colour of the substance, and determined solely by its greater or
less thickness—a circumstance which affords the means of ascertaining
the length of the waves of each coloured ray, and the
frequency of the vibrations of the particles producing them. If
a plate of glass be laid upon a lens of almost imperceptible
curvature, before an open window, when they are pressed together
a black spot will be seen in the point of contact, surrounded
by seven rings of vivid colours, all differing from one another
(N. 199). In the first ring, estimated from the black spot, the
colours succeed each other in the following order:—black, very
faint blue, brilliant white, yellow, orange, and red. They are
quite different in the other rings, and in the seventh the only
colours are pale bluish green and very pale pink. That these
rings are formed between the two surfaces in apparent contact
may be proved by laying a prism on the lens instead of the
plate of glass, and viewing the rings through the inclined side of
it that is next to the eye, which arrangement prevents the light
reflected from the upper surface mixing with that from the surfaces
in contact, so that the intervals between the rings appear
perfectly black—one of the strongest circumstances in favour of
the undulatory theory; for, although the phenomena of the
rings can be explained by either hypothesis, there is this material
difference, that, according to the undulatory theory, the intervals
between the rings ought to be absolutely black, which is confirmed
by experiment; whereas, by the doctrine of emanation,
they ought to be half illuminated, which is not found to be the
case. M. Fresnel, whose opinion is of the first authority, thought
this test conclusive. It may therefore be concluded that the
rings arise entirely from the interference of the rays: the light
reflected from each of the surfaces in apparent contact reaches
the eye by paths of different lengths, and produces coloured and
dark rings alternately, according as the reflected waves coincide
or destroy one another. The breadths of the rings are unequal;
they decrease in width, and the colours become more crowded,
as they recede from the centre. Coloured rings are also produced
by transmitting light through the same apparatus; but the
colours are less vivid, and are complementary to those reflected,
consequently the central spot is white.
172The size of the rings increases with the obliquity of the incident
light, the same colour requiring a greater thickness or space
between the glasses to produce it than when the light falls perpendicularly
upon them. Now, if the apparatus be placed in
homogeneous instead of white light, the rings will all be of the
same colour with that of the light employed, that is to say, if
the light be red, the rings will be red, divided by black intervals.
The size of the rings varies with the colour of the light. They
are largest in red, and decrease in magnitude with the succeeding
prismatic colours, being smallest in violet light.
Since one of the glasses is plane and the other spherical, it is
evident that from the point of contact the space between them
gradually increases in thickness all round, so that a certain
thickness of air corresponds to each colour, which in the undulatory
system measures the length of the wave producing it
(N. 200). By actual measurement Sir Isaac Newton found that
the squares of the diameters of the brightest part of each ring
are as the odd numbers, 1, 3, 5, 7, &c.; and that the squares of
the diameters of the darkest parts are as the even numbers,
0, 2, 4, 6, &c. Consequently, the intervals between the glasses
at these points are in the same proportion. If, then, the thickness
of the air corresponding to any one colour could be found,
its thickness for all the others would be known. Now, as Sir
Isaac Newton knew the radius of curvature of the lens, and the
actual breadth of the rings in parts of an inch, it was easy to
compute that the thickness of air at the darkest part of the first
ring is the
1⁄89000
part of an inch, whence all the others have been
deduced. As these intervals determine the length of the waves
on the undulatory hypothesis, it appears that the length of a
wave of the extreme red of the solar spectrum is equal to the
0·0000266th part of an inch; that the length of a wave of the
extreme violet is equal to the 0·0000167th part of an inch; and,
as the time of a vibration of a particle of ether producing any
particular colour is directly as the length of a wave of that
colour, and inversely as the velocity of light, it follows that the
molecules of ether producing the extreme red of the solar spectrum
perform 458 millions of millions of vibrations in a second;
and that those producing the extreme violet accomplish 727
millions of millions of vibrations in the same time. The lengths
of the waves of the intermediate colours, and the number of their
vibrations, being intermediate between these two, white light,
173which consists of all the colours, is consequently a mixture of
waves of all lengths between the limits of the extreme red and
violet. The determination of these minute portions of time and
space, both of which have a real existence, being the actual
results of measurement, do as much honour to the genius of
Newton as that of the law of gravitation.
The number of advancing waves of light in an inch is known
to be from 37,600 to 59,880, and the number of lateral vibrations
is from 458 to 727 billions in a second, but the extent of these
lateral vibrations of the particles of the ethereal medium is not
known, though both their extent and velocity are probably very
small compared with the length of the advancing waves and the
velocity of propagation. Colour is identified with the number of
vibrations; but whether reflection, refraction, absorption, &c.,
have any relations to the lateral vibrations, or whether they are
dependent in part upon some physical action of the ethereal
medium unknown and unsuspected, are points as yet undetermined.
To ascertain these circumstances, Dr. Faraday instituted
a series of the most refined experiments upon the relation of the
minute particles of metals to the vibrations of light.
Gold acts powerfully on light, and possesses a real transparency,
transmitting green rays when very thin; and being capable of
extreme division by solvents without losing its metallic character,
its particles transmit rays of various colours according to
their size; those that transmit the rose-colour in Bohemian glass
are of inconceivable minuteness. The progressive waves of the
ether are so long compared with the dimensions of the molecules
to which gold can be reduced, that it seemed probable to Dr.
Faraday when the latter were placed in a sunbeam that some
effective relation might be discovered between them and the
smaller vibrations of the ethereal medium; in which case, if
reflection, refraction, &c., depended upon such relations, there
was reason to expect that these functions would change sensibly
by the substitution of different sized particles of the gold for one
another. At one time Dr. Faraday hoped he had changed one
colour into another by means of gold, which would have been
equivalent to a change in the number of vibrations; but although
he has not yet confirmed that result, his researches are of the
greatest interest.[9]
174The phenomenon of the coloured rings takes place in vacuo as
well as in air, which proves that it is the distance between the
lenses alone, and not the air, which produces the colours. However,
if water or oil be put between them, the rings contract, but
no other change ensues; and Newton found that the thickness
of different media at which a given tint is seen is in the inverse
ratio of their refractive indices, so that the thickness of laminæ
which could not otherwise be measured may be known by their
colour; and, as the position of the colours in the rings is invariable,
they form a fixed standard of comparison, well known as
Newton’s scale of colours; each tint being estimated according
to the ring to which it belongs from the central spot inclusively.
Not only the periodical colours which have been described, but
the colours seen in thick plates of transparent substances, the
variable hues of feathers, of insects’ wings, mother-of-pearl, and
of striated substances, all depend upon the same principle. To
these may be added the coloured fringes surrounding the shadows
of all bodies held in an extremely small beam of light, and the
coloured rings surrounding the small beam itself when received
on a screen.
When a very slender sunbeam, passing through a small pin-hole
into a dark room, is received on a white screen, or plate of
ground-glass, at the distance of a little more than six feet, the
spot of light on the screen is larger than the pin-hole: and,
instead of being bounded by shadow, it is surrounded by a series
of coloured rings separated by obscure intervals. The rings are
more distinct in proportion to the smallness of the beam (N. 201).
When the light is white there are seven rings, which dilate or
contract with the distance of the screen from the hole. As the
distance of the screen diminishes, the white central spot contracts
to a point and vanishes; and, on approaching still nearer, the
rings gradually close in upon it, so that the centre assumes successively
the most intense and vivid hues. When the light is
homogeneous—red, for example—the rings are alternately red
and black, and more numerous; and their breadth varies with
the colour, being broadest in red light and narrowest in violet.
The tints of the coloured fringes from white light, and their obliteration
after the seventh ring, arise from the superposition of
the different sets of fringes of all the coloured rays. The shadows
of objects are also bordered by coloured fringes when held in this
175slender beam of light. If the edge of a knife or hair, for example,
be held in it, the rays, instead of proceeding in straight lines
past its edge, are bent when quite close to it, and proceed from
thence to the screen in curved lines called hyperbolas; so that
the shadow of the object is enlarged, and, instead of being at
once bounded by light, is surrounded or edged with coloured
fringes alternating with black bands, which are more distinct
the smaller the pin-hole (N. 202). The fringes are altogether
independent of the form or density of the object, being the same
when it is round or pointed, when of glass or platinum. When
the rays which form the fringes arrive at the screen, they are of
different lengths, in consequence of the curved path they follow
after passing the edge of the object. The waves are therefore in
different phases or states of vibration, and either conspire to
form coloured fringes or destroy one another in the obscure intervals.
The coloured fringes bordering the shadows of objects
were first described by Grimaldi in 1665; but, besides these, he
noticed that there are others within the shadows of slender
bodies exposed to a small sunbeam, a phenomenon which has
already been mentioned to have afforded Dr. Young the means
of proving, beyond all controversy, that coloured rings are produced
by the interference of light.
It may be concluded that material substances derive their
colours from two different causes: some from the law of interference,
such as iridescent metals, peacocks’ feathers, &c.; others
from the unequal absorption of the rays of white light, such as
vermilion, ultramarine, blue, or green cloth, flowers, and the
greater number of coloured bodies. The latter phenomena have
been considered extremely difficult to reconcile with the undulatory
theory of light, and much discussion has arisen as to what
becomes of the absorbed rays. But that embarrassing question
has been ably answered by Sir John Herschel in a most profound
paper on the Absorption of Light by coloured Media, and cannot
be better given than in his own words. It must, however,
be premised, that, as all transparent bodies are traversed by
light, they are presumed to be permeable to the ether. He
says,—“Now, as regards only the general fact of the obstruction
and ultimate extinction of light in its passage through gross
media, if we compare the corpuscular and undulatory theories,
we shall find that the former appeals to our ignorance, the latter
176to our knowledge, for its explanation of the absorptive phenomena.
In attempting to explain the extinction of light on the
corpuscular doctrine, we have to account for the light so extinguished
as a material body, which we must not suppose annihilated.
It may, however, be transformed; and among the imponderable
agents, heat, electricity, &c., it may be that we are to
search for the light which has become thus comparatively stagnant.
The heating power of the solar rays gives a primâ facie
plausibility to the idea of the transformation of light into heat
by absorption. But, when we come to examine the matter more
nearly, we find it encumbered on all sides with difficulties. How
is it, for instance, that the most luminous rays are not the most
calorific, but that, on the contrary, the calorific energy accompanies,
in its greatest intensity, rays which possess comparatively
feeble illuminating powers? These and other questions of a
similar nature may perhaps admit of answer in a more advanced
state of our knowledge; but at present there is none obvious.
It is not without reason, therefore, that the question, ‘What
becomes of light?’ which appears to have been agitated among
the photologists of the last century, has been regarded as one of
considerable importance as well as obscurity by the corpuscular
philosophers. On the other hand, the answer to this question,
afforded by the undulatory theory of light, is simple and distinct.
The question, ‘What becomes of light?’ merges in the
more general one, ‘What becomes of motion?’ And the
answer, on dynamical principles, is, that it continues for ever.
No motion is, strictly speaking, annihilated; but it may be
divided, and the divided parts made to oppose and in effect
destroy one another. A body struck, however perfectly elastic,
vibrates for a time, and then appears to sink into its original
repose. But this apparent rest (even abstracting from the inquiry
that part of the motion which may be conveyed away by the
ambient air) is nothing else than a state of subdivided and
mutually destroying motion, in which every molecule continues
to be agitated by an indefinite multitude of internally reflected
waves, propagated through it in every possible direction, from
every point in its surface on which they successively impinge.
The superposition of such waves will, it is easily seen, at length
operate their mutual destruction, which will be the more complete
the more irregular the figure of the body, and the greater
177the number of internal reflections.” Thus Sir John Herschel,
by referring the absorption of light to the subdivision and mutual
destruction of the vibrations of ether in the interior of bodies,
brings another class of phenomena under the laws of the undulatory
theory.
According to Mr. Rankin’s hypothesis of Molecular Vortices[10]
the absorption of light and radiant heat consists in the transference
of motion from the molecules to their atmospheres, and
conversely the emission of light and radiant heat is the transmission
of motion from the atmospheres to the molecules. The
great velocity of light and heat is a natural consequence of this
hypothesis, according to which the vibratory masses must be extremely
small compared with the forces exerted by them.
The ethereal medium pervading space is supposed to penetrate
all material substances, occupying the interstices between their
molecules; but in the interior of refracting media it exists in a
state of less elasticity compared with its density in vacuo; and,
the more refractive the medium, the less the elasticity of the
ether within it. Hence the waves of light are transmitted with
less velocity in such media as glass and water than in the external
ether. As soon as a ray of light reaches the surface of a
diaphanous reflecting substance, for example a plate of glass, it
communicates its undulations to the ether next in contact with
the surface, which thus becomes a new centre of motion, and two
hemispherical waves are propagated from each point of this
surface; one of which proceeds forward into the interior of the
glass, with a less velocity than the incident waves; and the
other is transmitted back into the air, with a velocity equal to
that with which it came (N. 203). Thus, when refracted, the
light moves with a different velocity without and within the
glass; when reflected, the ray comes and goes with the same
velocity. The particles of ether without the glass, which communicate
their motions to the particles of the dense and less
elastic ether within it, are analogous to small elastic balls striking
large ones; for some of the motion will be communicated to the
large balls, and the small ones will be reflected. The first would
cause the refracted wave, and the last the reflected. Conversely,
when the light passes from glass to air, the action is
similar to large balls striking small ones. The small balls
178receive a motion which would cause the refracted ray, and the
part of the motion retained by the large ones would occasion the
reflected wave; so that, when light passes through a plate of
glass or of any other medium differing in density from the air,
there is a reflection at both surfaces; but this difference exists
between the two reflections, that one is caused by a vibration in
the same direction with that of the incident ray, and the other by
a vibration in the opposite direction.
A single wave of air or ether would not produce the sensation
of sound or light. In order to excite vision, the vibrations of
the molecules of ether must be regular, periodical, and very often
repeated: and, as the ear continues to be agitated for a short
time after the impulse by which alone a sound becomes continuous,
so also the fibres of the retina, according to M. d’Arcet,
continue to vibrate for about the eighth part of a second after
the exciting cause has ceased. The interval of time during which
the impression lasts is longer for the blue than for red or white
light: it must not be less than 0ʺ·34. Every one must have
observed, when a strong impression is made by a bright light,
that an object remains visible for a short time after shutting the
eyes, which is supposed to be in consequence of the continued
vibrations of the fibres of the retina. Occasionally the retina
becomes insensible to feebly illuminated objects when continuously
presented. If the eye be turned aside for a moment, the
object becomes again visible. It is probably on this account that
the owl makes so peculiar a motion with its head when looking
at objects in the twilight. It is quite possible that many vibrations
may be excited in the ethereal medium incapable of producing
undulations in the fibres of the human retina, which yet
have a powerful effect on those of other animals or of insects.
Such may receive luminous impressions of which we are totally
unconscious, and at the same time they may be insensible to the
light and colours which affect our eyes, their perceptions beginning
where ours end.</div></body></text></TEI>