<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="17">
129
SECTION XVI.

Sound—Propagation of Sound illustrated by a Field of Standing Corn—Nature
of Waves—Propagation of Sound through the Atmosphere—Intensity—Noises—A
Musical Sound—Quality—Pitch—Extent of
Human Hearing—Velocity of Sound in Air, Water, and Solids—Causes
of the Obstruction of Sound—Law of its Intensity—Reflection
of Sound—Echoes—Thunder—Refraction of Sound—Interference
of Sounds.
One of the most important uses of the atmosphere is the conveyance
of sound. Without the air, deathlike silence would
prevail through nature, for in common with all substances it has
a tendency to impart vibrations to bodies in contact with it.
Therefore undulations received by the air, whether it be from
a sudden impulse, such as an explosion or the vibrations of a
musical chord, are propagated in every direction, and produce
the sensation of sound upon the auditory nerves. A bell rung
under the exhausted receiver of an air-pump is inaudible, which
shows that the atmosphere is really the medium of sound. In
the small undulations of deep water in a calm, the vibrations of
the liquid particles are made in the vertical plane, that is, up and
down, or at right angles to the direction of the transmission of
the waves. But the vibrations of the particles of air which
produce sound differ from these, being performed in the same
direction in which the waves of sound travel. The propagation
of sound has been illustrated by a field of corn agitated by the
wind. However irregular the motion of the corn may seem on a
superficial view, it will be found, if the velocity of the wind be
constant, that the waves are all precisely similar and equal,
and that all are separated by equal intervals and move in equal
times.
A sudden blast depresses each ear equally and successively in
the direction of the wind, but, in consequence of the elasticity of
the stalks and the force of the impulse, each ear not only rises
again as soon as the pressure is removed, but bends back nearly
as much in the contrary direction, and then continues to oscillate
130backwards and forwards in equal times, like a pendulum, to a
less and less extent, till the resistance of the air puts a stop to
the motion. These vibrations are the same for every individual
ear of corn. Yet, as their oscillations do not all commence at
the same time, but successively, the ears will have a variety of
positions at any one instant. Some of the advancing ears will
meet others in their returning vibrations, and, as the times of
oscillation are equal for all, they will be crowded together at
regular intervals. Between these there will occur equal spaces
where the ears will be few, in consequence of being bent in
opposite directions; and at other equal intervals they will be in
their natural upright positions. So that over the whole field
there will be a regular series of condensations and rarefactions
among the ears of corn, separated by equal intervals, where they
will be in their natural state of density. In consequence of these
changes the field will be marked by an alternation of bright and
dark bands. Thus the successive waves which fly over the corn
with the speed of the wind are totally distinct from, and entirely
independent of the extent of the oscillations of each individual
ear, though both take place in the same direction. The length of
a wave is equal to the space between two ears precisely in the
same state of motion, or which are moving similarly, and the
time of the vibration of each ear is equal to that which elapses
between the arrival of two successive waves at the same point.
The only difference between the undulations of a corn-field and
those of the air which produce sound is, that each ear of corn is
set in motion by an external cause, and is uninfluenced by the
motion of the rest; whereas in air, which is a compressible and
elastic fluid, when one particle begins to oscillate, it communicates
its vibrations to the surrounding particles, which transmit
them to those adjacent, and so on continually. Hence from the
successive vibrations of the particles of air the same regular
condensations and rarefactions take place as in the field of corn,
producing waves throughout the whole mass of air, though each
molecule like each individual ear of corn never moves far from its
state of rest. The small waves of a liquid, and the undulations
of the air, like waves in the corn, are evidently not real masses
moving in the direction in which they are advancing, but merely
outlines, motions, or forms passing along, and comprehending
all the particles of an undulating fluid which are at once in a
131vibratory state. It is thus that an impulse given to any one
point of the atmosphere is successively propagated in all directions,
in a wave diverging as from the centre of a sphere to
greater and greater distances, but with decreasing intensity, in
consequence of the increasing number of particles of inert matter
which the force has to move; like the waves formed in still
water by a falling stone, which are propagated circularly all
around the centre of disturbance (N. 160).
The intensity of sound depends upon the violence and extent
of the initial vibrations of air; but, whatever they may be, each
undulation when once formed can only be transmitted straight
forwards, and never returns back again unless when reflected by
an opposing obstacle. The vibrations of the aërial molecules are
always extremely small, whereas the waves of sound vary from a
few inches to several feet. The various musical instruments,
the human voice and that of animals, the singing of birds, the
hum of insects, the roar of the cataract, the whistling of the wind,
and the other nameless peculiarities of sound, show at once
an infinite variety in the modes of aërial vibration, and the
astonishing acuteness and delicacy of the ear, thus capable of
appreciating the minutest differences in the laws of molecular
oscillation.
All mere noises are occasioned by irregular impulses communicated
to the ear; and, if they be short, sudden, and repeated
beyond a certain degree of quickness, the ear loses the intervals
of silence, and the sound appears continuous. Still such sounds
will be mere noise: in order to produce a musical sound, the
impulses, and consequently the undulations of the air, must be
all exactly similar in duration and intensity, and must recur
after exactly equal intervals of time. If a blow be given to the
nearest of a series of broad, flat, and equidistant palisades, set
edgewise in a line direct from the ear, each palisade will repeat
or echo the sound; and these echoes, returning to the ear at
successive equal intervals of time, will produce a musical note.
The quality of a musical note depends upon the abruptness, and
its intensity upon the violence and extent of the original impulse.
In the theory of harmony the only property of sound taken into
consideration is the pitch, which varies with the rapidity of the
vibrations. The grave or low tones are produced by very slow
vibrations, which increase in frequency as the note becomes more
132acute. The lowest man’s voice makes 396 vibrations in a second,
whilst the highest woman’s voice makes 2112. Very deep tones
are not heard by all alike, and Dr. Wollaston, who made a variety
of experiments on the sense of hearing, found that many people,
though not at all deaf, are quite insensible to the cry of the bat
or the cricket, while to others it is painfully shrill. From his
experiments he concluded that human hearing is limited to about
nine octaves, extending from the lowest note of the organ to the
highest known cry of insects; and he observes with his usual
originality that, “as there is nothing in the nature of the atmosphere
to prevent the existence of vibrations incomparably more
frequent than any of which we are conscious, we may imagine
that animals like the Grylli, whose powers appear to commence
nearly where ours terminate, may have the faculty of hearing
still sharper sounds which we do not know to exist, and that
there may be other insects hearing nothing in common with
us, but endowed with a power of exciting, and a sense which
perceives vibrations, of the same nature indeed as those which
constitute our ordinary sounds, but so remote that the animals
which perceive them may be said to possess another sense, agreeing
with our own solely in the medium by which it is excited.”
M. Savart, so well known for the number and beauty of his
researches in acoustics, has proved that a high note of a given
intensity, being heard by some ears and not by others, must not
be attributed to its pitch, but to its feebleness. His experiments,
and those more recently made by Professor Wheatstone, show
that, if the pulses could be rendered sufficiently powerful, it
would be difficult to fix a limit to human hearing at either end
of the scale. M. Savart had a wheel made about nine inches in
diameter with 360 teeth set at equal distances round its rim, so
that while in motion each tooth successively hit on a piece of
card. The tone increased in pitch with the rapidity of the
rotation, and was very pure when the number of strokes did not
exceed three or four thousand in a second, but beyond that it
became feeble and indistinct. With a wheel of a larger size a
much higher tone could be obtained, because, the teeth being
wider apart, the blows were more intense and more separated
from one another. With 720 teeth on a wheel thirty-two inches
in diameter, the sound produced by 12,000 strokes in a second
was audible, which corresponds to 24,000 vibrations of a musical
133chord. So that the human ear can appreciate a sound which
only lasts the 24,000th part of a second. This note was distinctly
heard by M. Savart and by several people who were
present, which convinced him that with another apparatus still
more acute sounds might be rendered audible.
For the deep tones M. Savart employed a bar of iron, two feet
eight inches long, about two inches broad, and half an inch in
thickness, which revolved about its centre as if its arms were the
spokes of a wheel. When such a machine rotates, it impresses a
motion on the air similar to its own, and, when a thin board or
card is brought close to its extremities, the current of air is
momentarily interrupted at the instant each arm of the bar
passes before the card; it is compressed above the card and
dilated below; but the instant the spoke has passed a rush of air
to restore equilibrium makes a kind of explosion, and, when these
succeed each other rapidly, a musical note is produced of a pitch
proportional to the velocity of the revolution. When M. Savart
turned this bar slowly, a succession of single beats was heard;
as the velocity became greater, the sound was only a rattle; but,
as soon as it was sufficient to give eight beats in a second, a very
deep musical note was distinctly audible corresponding to sixteen
single vibrations in a second, which is the lowest that has hitherto
been produced. When the velocity of the bar was much increased,
the intensity of the sound was hardly bearable. The spokes of
a revolving wheel produce the sensation of sound, on the very
same principle that a burning stick whirled round gives the
impression of a luminous circle. The vibrations excited in the
organ of hearing by one beat have not ceased before another
impulse is given. Indeed it is indispensable that the impressions
made upon the auditory nerves should encroach upon each other
in order to produce a full and continued note. On the whole,
M. Savart has come to the conclusion, that the most acute sounds
would be heard with as much ease as those of a lower pitch, if
the duration of the sensation produced by each pulse could be
diminished proportionally to the augmentation of the number of
pulses in a given time: and on the contrary, if the duration
of the sensation produced by each pulse could be increased in
proportion to their number in a given time, that the deepest
tones would be as audible as any of the others.
The velocity of sound is uniform and independent of the
134nature, extent, and intensity of the primitive disturbance. Consequently
sounds of every quality and pitch travel with equal
speed. The smallest difference in their velocity is incompatible
either with harmony or melody, for notes of different pitches and
intensities, sounded together at a little distance, would arrive at
the ear in different times. A rapid succession of notes would in
this case produce confusion and discord. But, as the rapidity
with which sound is transmitted depends upon the elasticity of
the medium through which it has to pass, whatever tends to
increase the elasticity of the air must also accelerate the motion
of sound. On that account its velocity is greater in warm than
in cold weather, supposing the pressure of the atmosphere constant.
In dry air, at the freezing temperature, sound travels at
the rate of 1090 feet in a second, and for any higher temperature
one foot must be added for every degree of the thermometer
above 32°: hence at 62° of Fahrenheit its speed in a second is
1120 feet, or 765 miles an hour, which is about three-fourths
of the diurnal velocity of the earth’s equator. Since all the
phenomena of the transmission of sound are simple consequences
of the physical properties of the air, they have been predicted
and computed rigorously by the laws of mechanics. It was
found, however, that the velocity of sound, determined by observation,
exceeded what it ought to have been theoretically by
173 feet, or about one-sixth of the whole amount. La Place
suggested that this discrepancy might arise from the increased
elasticity of the air in consequence of a development of latent or
absorbed heat (N. 178) during the undulations of sound, and
calculation confirmed the accuracy of his views. The aërial
molecules being suddenly compressed give out their absorbed
heat; and, as air is too bad a conductor to carry it rapidly off,
it occasions a momentary and local rise of temperature, which,
increasing the elasticity of the air without at the same time
increasing its inertia, causes the movement to be propagated
more rapidly. Analysis gives the true velocity of sound in terms
of the elevation of temperature that a mass of air is capable of
communicating to itself, by the disengagement of its own absorbed
heat when suddenly compressed in a given ratio. This change
of temperature however could not be obtained directly by any
experiments which had been made at that epoch; but by inverting
the problem, and assuming the velocity of sound as given by
135experiment, it was computed that the temperature of a mass of
air is raised nine-tenths of a degree when the compression is
equal to
1⁄116
of its volume.
Probably all liquids are elastic, though considerable force is
required to compress them. Water suffers a condensation of
nearly 0·0000496 for every atmosphere of pressure, and is consequently
capable of conveying sound even more rapidly than
air, the velocity in the former being 4708 feet in a second. A
person under water hears sounds made in air feebly, but those
produced in water very distinctly. According to the experiments
of M. Colladon, the sound of a bell was conveyed under
water through the Lake of Geneva to the distance of about nine
miles. He also perceived that the progress of sound through
water is greatly impeded by the interposition of any object,
such as a projecting wall; consequently sound under water resembles
light in having a distinct shadow. It has much less in
air, being transmitted all round buildings or other obstacles, so
as to be heard in every direction, though often with a considerable
diminution of intensity, as when a carriage turns the corner of
a street.
The velocity of sound in passing through solids is in proportion
to their hardness, and is much greater than in air or water.
A sound which takes some time in travelling through the air
passes almost instantaneously along a wire six hundred feet long;
consequently it is heard twice—first as communicated by the
wire, and afterwards through the medium of the air. The
facility with which the vibrations of sound are transmitted along
the grain of a log of wood is well known. Indeed they pass
through iron, glass, and some kinds of wood, at the rate of
18,530 feet in a second. The velocity of sound is obstructed by
a variety of circumstances, such as falling snow, fog, rain, or any
other cause which disturbs the homogeneity of the medium
through which it has to pass. M. de Humboldt says that it is
on account of the greater homogeneity of the atmosphere during
the night that sounds are then better heard than during the day,
when its density is perpetually changing from partial variations
of temperature. His attention was called to this subject on the
plain surrounding the Mission of the Apures by the rushing noise
of the great cataracts of the Orinoco, which seemed to be three
times as loud by night as by day. This he illustrated by experiment.
136A tall glass half full of champagne cannot be made
to ring as long as the effervescence lasts. In order to produce a
musical note, the glass together with the liquid it contains must
vibrate in unison as a system, which it cannot do in consequence
of the fixed air rising through the wine and disturbing its homogeneity,
because, the vibrations of the gas being much slower
than those of the liquid, the velocity of the sound is perpetually
interrupted. For the same reason the transmission of sound as
well as light is impeded in passing through an atmosphere of
variable density. Sir John Herschel, in his admirable Treatise
on Sound, thus explains the phenomenon:—“It is obvious,” he
says, “that sound as well as light must be obstructed, stifled,
and dissipated from its original direction by the mixture of air
of different temperatures, and consequently elasticities; and
thus the same cause which produces that extreme transparency
of the air at night, which astronomers alone fully appreciate,
renders it also more favourable to sound. There is no doubt,
however, that the universal and dead silence generally prevalent
at night renders our auditory nerves sensible to impressions
which would otherwise escape notice. The analogy between
sound and light is perfect in this as in so many other respects.
In the general light of day the stars disappear. In the continual
hum of voices, which is always going on by day, and
which reach us from all quarters, and never leave the ear time
to attain complete tranquillity, those feeble sounds which catch
our attention at night make no impression. The ear, like the
eye, requires long and perfect repose to attain its utmost sensibility.”
Many instances may be brought in proof of the strength and
clearness with which sound passes over the surface of water or
ice. Lieutenant Forster was able to carry on a conversation
across Port Bowen Harbour, when frozen, a distance of a mile
and a half.
The intensity of sound depends upon the extent of the excursions
of the fluid molecules, on the energy of the transient condensations
and dilatations, and on the greater or less number of
particles which experience these effects. We estimate that intensity
by the impetus of these fluid molecules on our organs,
which is consequently as the square of the velocity, and not by
their inertia, which is as the simple velocity. Were the latter
137the case, there would be no sound, because the inertia of the
receding waves of air would destroy the equal and opposite
inertia of those advancing; whence it may be concluded that the
intensity of sound diminishes inversely as the square of the distance
from its origin. In a tube, however, the force of sound
does not decay as in open air, unless perhaps by friction against
the sides. M. Biot found, from a number of highly-interesting
experiments made on the pipes of the aqueducts in Paris, that a
continued conversation could be carried on in the lowest possible
whisper through a cylindrical tube about 3120 feet long, the
time of transmission through that space being 2·79 seconds. In
most cases sound diverges in all directions so as to occupy at
any one time a spherical surface; but Dr. Young has shown
that there are exceptions, as, for example, when a flat surface
vibrates only in one direction. The sound is then most intense
when the ear is at right angles to the surface, whereas it is
scarcely audible in a direction precisely perpendicular to its edge.
In this case it is impossible that the whole of the surrounding
air can be affected in the same manner, since the particles behind
the sounding surface must be moving towards it whenever the
particles before it are retreating. Hence in one half of the surrounding
sphere of air its motions are retrograde, while in the
other half they are direct; consequently, at the edges where
these two portions meet, the motions of the air will neither be
retrograde nor direct, and therefore it must be at rest.
It appears, from theory as well as daily experience, that sound
is capable of reflection from surfaces (N. 179) according to the
same laws as light. Indeed any one who has observed the reflection
of the waves from a wall on the side of a river, after the
passage of a steam-boat, will have a perfect idea of the reflection
of sound and of light. As every substance in nature is more or
less elastic, it may be agitated according to its own law by the
impulse of a mass of undulating air; and reciprocally the surface
by its reaction will communicate its undulations back again
into the air. Such reflections produce echoes; and as a series of
them may take place between two or more obstacles, each will
cause an echo of the original sound, growing fainter and fainter
till it dies away; because sound, like light, is weakened by reflection.
Should the reflecting surface be concave towards a
person, the sound will converge towards him with increased intensity,
138which will be greater still if the surface be spherical and
concentric with him. Undulations of sound diverging from one
focus of an elliptical shell (N. 180) converge in the other after
reflection. Consequently a sound from the one will be heard in
the other as if it were close to the ear. The rolling noise of
thunder has been attributed to reverberation between different
clouds, which may possibly be the case to a certain extent. Sir
John Herschel is of opinion that an intensely prolonged peal is
probably owing to a combination of sounds, because, the velocity
of electricity being incomparably greater than that of sound, the
thunder may be regarded as originating in every point of a flash
of lightning at the same instant. The sound from the nearest
point will arrive first; and if the flash run in a direct line from
a person, the noise will come later and later from the remote
points of its path in a continued roar. Should the direction of
the flash be inclined, the succession of sounds will be more rapid
and intense: and if the lightning describe a circular curve round
a person, the sound will arrive from every point at the same
instant with a stunning crash. In like manner the subterranean
noises heard during earthquakes like distant thunder may arise
from the consecutive arrival at the ear of undulations propagated
at the same instant from nearer and more remote points; or if
they originate in the same point, the sound may come by different
routes through strata of different densities.
Sounds under water are heard very distinctly in the air immediately
above; but the intensity decays with great rapidity as
the observer goes farther off, and is altogether inaudible at the
distance of two or three hundred yards. So that waves of sound,
like those of light, in passing from a dense to a rare medium,
are not only refracted, but suffer total reflection at very oblique
incidences (N. 189).
The laws of interference extend also to sound. It is clear that
two equal and similar musical strings will be in unison if they
communicate the same number of vibrations to the air in the
same time. But if two such strings be so nearly in unison that
one performs a hundred vibrations in a second, and the other a
hundred and one in the same period—during the first few vibrations
the two resulting sounds will combine to form one of
double the intensity of either, because the aërial waves will sensibly
coincide in time and place; but one will gradually gain
139on the other till at the fiftieth vibration it will be half an oscillation
in advance. Then the waves of air which produce the
sound being sensibly equal, but the receding part of the one
coinciding with the advancing part of the other, they will destroy
one another, and occasion an instant of silence. The sound will
be renewed immediately after, and will gradually increase till
the hundredth vibration, when the two waves will combine to
produce a sound double the intensity of either. These intervals of
silence and greatest intensity, called beats, will recur every
second; but if the notes differ much from one another, the alternations
will resemble a rattle; and if the strings be in perfect
unison, there will be no beats, since there will be no interference.
Thus by interference is meant the co-existence of two undulations
in which the lengths of the waves are the same. And as
the magnitude of an undulation may be diminished by the addition
of another transmitted in the same direction, it follows that
one undulation may be absolutely destroyed by another when
waves of the same length are transmitted in the same direction,
provided that the maxima of the undulations are equal, and that
one follows the other by half the length of a wave. A tuning-fork
affords a good example of interference. When that instrument
vibrates, its two branches alternately recede from and
approach one another; each communicates its vibrations to the
air, and a musical note is the consequence. If the fork be held
upright about a foot from the ear, and turned round its axis
while vibrating, at every quarter revolution the sound will
scarcely be heard, while at the intermediate points it will be
strong and clear. This phenomenon arises from the interference
of the undulations of air coming from the two branches of the
fork. When the two branches coincide, or when they are at
equal distances from the ear, the waves of air combine to reinforce
each other; but at the quadrants, where the two branches
are at unequal distances from the ear, the lengths of the waves
differ by half an undulation, and consequently destroy one
another.</div></body></text></TEI>