<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="2">
4
SECTION I.

Attraction of a Sphere—Form of Celestial Bodies—Terrestrial Gravitation
retains the Moon in her Orbit—The Heavenly Bodies move in
Conic Sections—Gravitation Proportional to Mass—Gravitation of
the Particles of Matter—Figure of the Planets—How it affects the
Motions of their Satellites—Rotation and Translation impressed by the
same Impulse—Motion of the Sun and Solar System.
It has been proved by Newton, that a particle of matter (N. 6)
placed without the surface of a hollow sphere (N. 7) is attracted
by it in the same manner as if the mass of the hollow sphere, or
the whole matter it contains, were collected into one dense particle
in its centre. The same is therefore true of a solid sphere, which
may be supposed to consist of an infinite number of concentric
hollow spheres (N. 8). This, however, is not the case with a
spheroid (N. 9); but the celestial bodies are so nearly spherical,
and at such remote distances from one another, that they attract
and are attracted as if each were condensed into a single particle
situate in its centre of gravity (N. 10)—a circumstance which
greatly facilitates the investigation of their motions.
Newton has shown that the force which retains the moon in
her orbit is the same with that which causes heavy substances
to fall at the surface of the earth. If the earth were a sphere, and
at rest, a body would be equally attracted, that is, it would have
the same weight at every point of its surface, because the surface
of a sphere is everywhere equally distant from its centre. But,
as our planet is flattened at the poles (N. 11), and bulges at the
equator, the weight of the same body gradually decreases from
the poles, where it is greatest, to the equator, where it is least.
There is, however, a certain mean (N. 12) latitude (N. 13), or
part of the earth intermediate between the pole and the equator,
where the attraction of the earth on bodies at its surface is the
same as if it were a sphere; and experience shows that bodies
there fall through 16·0697 feet in a second. The mean distance
(N. 14) of the moon from the earth is about sixty times the mean
radius (N. 15) of the earth. When the number 16·0697 is diminished
5in the ratio (N. 16) of 1 to 3600, which is the square
of the moon’s distance (N. 17) from the earth’s centre, estimated
in terrestrial radii, it is found to be exactly the space the moon
would fall through in the first second of her descent to the earth,
were she not prevented by the centrifugal force (N. 18) arising
from the velocity with which she moves in her orbit. The moon
is thus retained in her orbit by a force having the same origin,
and regulated by the same law, with that which causes a stone
to fall at the earth’s surface. The earth may, therefore, be regarded
as the centre of a force which extends to the moon; and, as experience
shows that the action and reaction of matter are equal and
contrary (N. 19), the moon must attract the earth with an equal
and contrary force.
Newton also ascertained that a body projected (N. 20) in space
(N. 21) will move in a conic section (N. 22), if attracted by a
force proceeding from a fixed point, with an intensity inversely
as the square of the distance (N. 23); but that any deviation
from that law will cause it to move in a curve of a different
nature. Kepler found, by direct observation, that the planets
describe ellipses (N. 24), or oval paths, round the sun. Later
observations show that comets also move in conic sections. It
consequently follows that the sun attracts all the planets and
comets inversely as the square of their distances from its centre;
the sun, therefore, is the centre of a force extending indefinitely
in space, and including all the bodies of the system in its action.
Kepler also deduced from observation that the squares of the
periodic times (N. 25) of the planets, or the times of their revolutions
round the sun, are proportional to the cubes of their mean
distances from its centre (N. 26). Hence the intensity of gravitation
of all the bodies towards the sun is the same at equal
distances. Consequently, gravitation is proportional to the masses
(N. 27); for, if the planets and comets were at equal distances
from the sun, and left to the effects of gravity, they would arrive
at his surface at the same time (N. 28). The satellites also gravitate
to their primaries (N. 29) according to the same law that
their primaries do to the sun. Thus, by the law of action and
reaction, each body is itself the centre of an attractive force extending
indefinitely in space, causing all the mutual disturbances
which render the celestial motions so complicated, and their investigation
so difficult.
6The gravitation of matter directed to a centre, and attracting
directly as the mass and inversely as the square of the distance,
does not belong to it when considered in mass only; particle acts
on particle according to the same law when at sensible distances
from each other. If the sun acted on the centre of the earth,
without attracting each of its particles, the tides would be very
much greater than they now are, and would also, in other respects,
be very different. The gravitation of the earth to the sun results
from the gravitation of all its particles, which, in their turn,
attract the sun in the ratio of their respective masses. There is
a reciprocal action likewise between the earth and every particle
at its surface. The earth and a feather mutually attract each
other in the proportion of the mass of the earth to the mass of the
feather. Were this not the case, and were any portion of the
earth, however small, to attract another portion, and not be itself
attracted, the centre of gravity of the earth would be moved in
space by this action, which is impossible.
The forms of the planets result from the reciprocal attraction
of their component particles. A detached fluid mass, if at rest,
would assume the form of a sphere, from the reciprocal attraction
of its particles. But if the mass revolve about an axis, it becomes
flattened at the poles and bulges at the equator (N. 11), in consequence
of the centrifugal force arising from the velocity of rotation
(N. 30); for the centrifugal force diminishes the gravity of
the particles at the equator, and equilibrium can only exist where
these two forces are balanced by an increase of gravity. Therefore,
as the attractive force is the same on all particles at equal
distances from the centre of a sphere, the equatorial particles
would recede from the centre, till their increase in number
balance the centrifugal force by their attraction. Consequently,
the sphere would become an oblate or flattened spheroid, and a
fluid, partially or entirely covering a solid, as the ocean and
atmosphere cover the earth, must assume that form in order to
remain in equilibrio. The surface of the sea is, therefore, spheroidal,
and the surface of the earth only deviates from that figure
where it rises above or sinks below the level of the sea. But the
deviation is so small, that it is unimportant when compared with
the magnitude of the earth; for the mighty chain of the Andes,
and the yet more lofty Himalaya, bear about the same proportion
to the earth that a grain of sand does to a globe three feet in
7diameter. Such is the form of the earth and planets. The compression
(N. 31) or flattening at their poles is, however, so small,
that even Jupiter, whose rotation is the most rapid, and therefore
the most elliptical of the planets, may, from his great
distance, be regarded as spherical. Although the planets attract
each other as if they were spheres, on account of their distances,
yet the satellites (N. 32) are near enough to be sensibly affected
in their motions by the forms of their primaries. The moon, for
example, is so near the earth, that the reciprocal attraction between
each of her particles, and each of the particles in the prominent
mass at the terrestrial equator, occasions considerable disturbances
in the motions of both bodies; for the action of the moon on the
matter at the earth’s equator produces a nutation (N. 33) in the
axis (N. 34) of rotation, and the reaction of that matter on the
moon is the cause of a corresponding nutation in the lunar orbit
(N. 35).
If a sphere at rest in space receive an impulse passing through
its centre of gravity, all its parts will move with an equal velocity
in a straight line; but, if the impulse does not pass through the
centre of gravity, its particles, having unequal velocities, will have
a rotatory or revolving motion, at the same time that it is translated
(N. 36) in space. These motions are independent of one
another; so that a contrary impulse, passing through its centre of
gravity, will impede its progress, without interfering with its
rotation. The sun rotates about an axis, and modern observations
show that an impulse in a contrary direction has not been
given to his centre of gravity, for he moves in space, accompanied
by all those bodies which compose the solar system—a circumstance
which in no way interferes with their relative motions;
for, in consequence of the principle that force is proportional to
velocity (N. 37), the reciprocal attractions of a system remain the
same whether its centre of gravity be at rest, or moving uniformly
in space. It is computed that, had the earth received
its motion from a single impulse, that impulse must have passed
through a point about twenty-five miles from its centre.
Since the motions of rotation and translation of the planets are
independent of each other, though probably communicated by
the same impulse, they form separate subjects of investigation.</div></body></text></TEI>