<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="11">
71
SECTION X.

Rotation of the Earth invariable—Decrease in the Earth’s mean Temperature—Earth
originally in a state of Fusion—Length of Day constant—Decrease
of Temperature ascribed by Sir John Herschel to the variation
in the Excentricity of the Terrestrial Orbit—Difference in the
Temperature of the two Hemispheres erroneously ascribed to the Excess
in the Length of Spring and Summer in the Southern Hemisphere; attributed
by Sir Charles Lyell to the Operation of existing Causes—Three
principal Axes of Rotation—Position of the Axis of Rotation on the
Surface of the Earth invariable—Ocean not sufficient to restore the
Equilibrium of the Earth if deranged—Its Density and mean Depth—Internal
Structure of the Earth.
The rotation of the earth, which determines the length of the
day, may be regarded as one of the most important elements in
the system of the world. It serves as a measure of time, and
forms the standard of comparison for the revolutions of the
celestial bodies, which, by their proportional increase or decrease,
would soon disclose any changes it might sustain. Theory and
observation concur in proving that, among the innumerable vicissitudes
which prevail throughout creation, the period of the
earth’s diurnal rotation is immutable. The water of rivers,
falling from a higher to a lower level, carries with it the velocity
due to its revolution with the earth at a greater distance from
the centre; it will therefore accelerate, although to an almost
infinitesimal extent, the earth’s daily rotation. The sum of all
these increments of velocity, arising from the descent of all
the rivers on the earth’s surface, would in time become perceptible,
did not nature, by the process of evaporation, raise the
waters back to their sources, and thus, by again removing matter
to a greater distance from the centre, destroy the velocity generated
by its previous approach; so that the descent of rivers
does not affect the earth’s rotation. Enormous masses projected
by volcanoes from the equator to the poles, and the contrary,
would indeed affect it, but there is no evidence of such convulsions.
The disturbing action of the moon and planets, which has
so powerful an effect on the revolution of the earth, in no way
72influences its rotation. The constant friction of the trade winds
on the mountains and continents between the tropics does not
impede its velocity, which theory even proves to be the same as
if the sea, together with the earth, formed one solid mass. But,
although these circumstances be insufficient, a variation in the
mean temperature would certainly occasion a corresponding
change in the velocity of rotation. In the science of dynamics
it is a principle in a system of bodies or of particles revolving
about a fixed centre, that the momentum or sum of the products
of the mass of each into its angular velocity and distance from
the centre is a constant quantity, if the system be not deranged
by a foreign cause. Now, since the number of particles in the
system is the same whatever its temperature may be, when their
distances from the centre are diminished, their angular velocity
must be increased, in order that the preceding quantity may still
remain constant. It follows, then, that, as the primitive momentum
of rotation with which the earth was projected into
space must necessarily remain the same, the smallest decrease in
heat, by contracting the terrestrial spheroid, would accelerate its
rotation, and consequently diminish the length of the day. Notwithstanding
the constant accession of heat from the sun’s rays,
geologists have been induced to believe, from the fossil remains,
that the mean temperature of the globe is decreasing.
The high temperature of mines, hot springs, and above all the
internal fires which have produced, and do still occasion, such
devastation on our planet, indicate an augmentation of heat
towards its centre. The increase of density corresponding to the
depth and the form of the spheroid, being what theory assigns to
a fluid mass in rotation, concurs to induce the idea that the temperature
of the earth was originally so high as to reduce all the
substances of which it is composed to a state of fusion or of
vapour, and that in the course of ages it has cooled down to its
present state; that it is still becoming colder; and that it will
continue to do so till the whole mass arrives at the temperature
of the medium in which it is placed, or rather at a state of equilibrium
between this temperature, the cooling power of its own
radiation, and the heating effect of the sun’s rays.
Previous to the formation of ice at the poles, the ancient lands
of northern latitudes might, no doubt, have been capable of producing
those tropical plants preserved in the coal-measures, if
73indeed such plants could flourish without the intense light of a
tropical sun. But, even if the decreasing temperature of the
earth be sufficient to produce the observed effects, it must be
extremely slow in its operation; for, in consequence of the
rotation of the earth being a measure of the periods of the celestial
motions, it has been proved that, if the length of the day
had decreased by the three-thousandth part of a second since the
observations of Hipparchus two thousand years ago, it would
have diminished the secular equation of the moon by 44ʺ·4. It
is, therefore, beyond a doubt that the mean temperature of the
earth cannot have sensibly varied during that time. If, then,
the appearances exhibited by the strata are really owing to a
decrease of internal temperature, it either shows the immense
periods requisite to produce geological changes, to which two
thousand years are as nothing, or that the mean temperature of
the earth had arrived at a state of equilibrium before these
observations.
However strong the indications of the primitive fluidity of the
earth, as there is no direct proof of it, the hypothesis can only
be regarded as very probable. But one of the most profound
philosophers and elegant writers of modern times has found in
the secular variation of the excentricity of the terrestrial orbit
an evident cause of decreasing temperature. That accomplished
author, in pointing out the mutual dependencies of phenomena,
says, “It is evident that the mean temperature of the whole
surface of the globe, in so far as it is maintained by the action of
the sun at a higher degree than it would have were the sun extinguished,
must depend on the mean quantity of the sun’s rays
which it receives, or—which comes to the same thing—on the
total quantity received in a given invariable time; and, the
length of the year being unchangeable in all the fluctuations of
the planetary system, it follows that the total amount of solar
radiation will determine, cæteris paribus, the general climate of
the earth. Now, it is not difficult to show that this amount is
inversely proportional to the minor axis of the ellipse described
by the earth about the sun (N. 143), regarded as slowly variable;
and that, therefore, the major axis remaining, as we know
it to be, constant, and the orbit being actually in a state of
approach to a circle, and consequently the minor axis being on
the increase, the mean annual amount of solar radiation received
74by the whole earth must be actually on the decrease. We have,
therefore, an evident real cause to account for the phenomenon.”
The limits of the variation in the excentricity of the earth’s orbit
are unknown. But, if its ellipticity has ever been as great as
that of the orbit of Mercury or Pallas, the mean temperature of
the earth must have been sensibly higher than it is at present.
Whether it was great enough to render our northern climates fit
for the production of tropical plants, and for the residence of the
elephant and other animals now inhabitants of the torrid zone, it
is impossible to say.
Of the decrease in temperature of the northern hemisphere
there is abundant evidence in the fossil plants discovered in
very high latitudes, which could only have existed in a tropical
climate, and which must have grown near the spot where they
are found, from the delicacy of their structure and the perfect
state of their preservation. This change of temperature has been
erroneously ascribed to an excess in the duration of spring and
summer in the northern hemisphere, in consequence of the excentricity
of the solar ellipse. The length of the seasons varies with
the position of the perihelion (N. 64) of the earth’s orbit for two
reasons. On account of the excentricity, small as it is, any line
passing through the centre of the sun divides the terrestrial
ellipse into two unequal parts, and by the laws of elliptical
motion the earth moves through these two portions with unequal
velocities. The perihelion always lies in the smaller portion,
and there the earth’s motion is the most rapid. In the present
position of the perihelion, spring and summer north of the equator
exceed by about eight days the duration of the same seasons
south of it. And 10,492 years ago the southern hemisphere
enjoyed the advantage we now possess from the secular variation
of the perihelion. Yet Sir John Herschel has shown that
by this alternation neither hemisphere acquires any excess of
light or heat above the other; for, although the earth is nearer
to the sun while moving through that part of its orbit in which
the perihelion lies than in the other part, and consequently
receives a greater quantity of light and heat, yet as it moves
faster it is exposed to the heat for a shorter time. In the other
part of the orbit, on the contrary, the earth, being farther from
the sun, receives fewer of his rays; but because its motion is
slower, it is exposed to them for a longer time; and, as in both
75cases the quantity of heat and the angular velocity vary exactly
in the same proportion, a perfect compensation takes place
(N. 144). So that the excentricity of the earth’s orbit has little
or no effect on the temperature corresponding to the difference of
the seasons.
Sir Charles Lyell, in his excellent works on Geology, refers the
increased cold of the northern hemisphere to the operation of
existing causes with more probability than most theories that
have been advanced in solution of this difficult subject. The
loftiest mountains would be represented by a grain of sand on
a globe six feet in diameter, and the depth of the ocean by a
scratch on its surface. Consequently the gradual elevation of a
continent or chain of mountains above the surface of the ocean, or
their depression below it, is no very great event compared with
the magnitude of the earth, and the energy of its subterranean
fires, if the same periods of time be admitted in the progress of
geological as in astronomical phenomena, which the successive
and various races of extinct beings show to have been immense.
Climate is always more intense in the interior of continents than
in islands or sea-coasts. An increase of land within the tropics
would therefore augment the general heat, and an increase in the
temperate and frigid zones would render the cold more severe.
Now it appears that most of the European, North Asiatic, and
North American continents and islands were raised from the
deep after the coal-measures were formed in which the fossil
tropical plants are found; and a variety of geological facts indicate
the existence of an ancient and extensive archipelago
throughout the greater part of the northern hemisphere. Sir
Charles Lyell is therefore of opinion that the climate of these
islands must have been sufficiently mild, in consequence of the surrounding
ocean, to clothe them with tropical plants, and render
them a fit abode for the huge animals whose fossil remains are
so often found; that the arborescent ferns and the palms of
these regions, carried by streams to the bottom of the ocean, were
imbedded in the strata which were by degrees heaved up by
the subterranean fires during a long succession of ages, till the
greater part of the northern hemisphere became dry land as it
now is, and that the consequence has been a continual decrease
of temperature.
It is evident, from the marine shells found on the tops of the
76highest mountains and in almost every part of the globe, that
immense continents have been elevated above the ocean which
must have engulfed others. Such a catastrophe would be occasioned
by a variation in the position of the axis of rotation on
the surface of the earth; for the seas tending to a new equator
would leave some portions of the globe and overwhelm others.
Now, it is found by the laws of mechanics that in every body,
be its form or density what it may, there are at least three axes
at right angles to each other, round any one of which, if the
solid begins to rotate, it will continue to revolve for ever, provided
it be not disturbed by a foreign cause, but that the rotation
about any other axis will only be for an instant, and consequently
the poles or extremities of the instantaneous axis of
rotation would perpetually change their position on the surface
of the body. In an ellipsoid of revolution the polar diameter and
every diameter in the plane of the equator are the only permanent
axes of rotation (N. 145). Hence, if the ellipsoid were to begin
to revolve about any diameter between the pole and the equator,
the motion would be so unstable that the axis of rotation and the
position of the poles would change every instant. Therefore, as
the earth does not differ much from this figure, if it did not turn
round one of its principal axes, the position of the poles would
change daily; the equator, which is 90° distant, would undergo
corresponding variations; and the geographical latitudes of all
places, being estimated from the equator, assumed to be fixed,
would be perpetually changing. A displacement in the position
of the poles of only two hundred miles would be sufficient to
produce these effects, and would immediately be detected. But,
as the latitudes are found to be invariable, it may be concluded
that the terrestrial spheroid must have revolved about the same
axis for ages. The earth and planets differ so little from ellipsoids
of revolution, that in all probability any libration from one
axis to another, produced by the primitive impulse which put
them in motion, must have ceased soon after their creation from
the friction of the fluids at their surface.
Theory also proves that neither nutation, precession, nor any
of the disturbing forces that affect the system, have the smallest
influence on the axis of rotation, which maintains a permanent
position on the surface, if the earth be not disturbed in its rotation
by a foreign cause, as the collision of a comet, which might
77have happened in the immensity of time. But, had that been
the case, its effects would still have been perceptible in the variations
of the geographical latitudes. If we suppose that such an
event had taken place, and that the disturbance had been very
great, equilibrium could then only have been restored with regard
to a new axis of rotation by the rushing of the seas to the new
equator, which they must have continued to do till the surface
was everywhere perpendicular to the direction of gravity. But
it is probable that such an accumulation of the waters would not
be sufficient to restore equilibrium if the derangement had been
great, for the mean density of the sea is only about a fifth part
of the mean density of the earth, and the mean depth of the
Pacific Ocean is supposed not to be more than four or five miles,
whereas the equatorial diameter of the earth exceeds the polar
diameter by about
261⁄2
miles. Consequently the influence of the
sea on the direction of gravity is very small. And, as it thus
appears that a great change in the position of the axis is incompatible
with the law of equilibrium, the geological phenomena
in question must be ascribed to an internal cause. Indeed it is
now demonstrated that the strata containing marine diluvia,
which are in lofty situations, must have been formed at the
bottom of the ocean, and afterwards upheaved by the action of
subterraneous fires. Besides, it is clear, from the mensuration
of the arcs of the meridian and the length of the seconds’ pendulum,
as well as from the lunar theory, that the internal strata
and also the external outline of the globe are elliptical, their
centres being coincident and their axes identical with that of the
surface—a state of things which, according to the distinguished
author lately quoted, is incompatible with a subsequent accommodation
of the surface to a new and different state of rotation
from that which determined the original distribution of the component
matter. Thus, amidst the mighty revolutions which
have swept innumerable races of organized beings from the earth,
which have elevated plains and buried mountains in the ocean,
the rotation of the earth and the position of the axes on its surface
have undergone but slight variations.
The strata of the terrestrial spheroid are not only concentric
and elliptical, but the lunar inequalities show that they increase
in density from the surface of the earth to its centre. This
would certainly have happened if the earth had originally been
78fluid, for the denser parts must have subsided towards the centre
as it approached a state of equilibrium. But the enormous
pressure of the superincumbent mass is a sufficient cause for the
phenomenon. Professor Leslie observes that air compressed into
the fiftieth part of its volume has its elasticity fifty times augmented.
If it continues to contract at that rate, it would, from
its own incumbent weight, acquire the density of water at the
depth of thirty-four miles. But water itself would have its
density doubled at the depth of ninety-three miles, and would
even attain the density of quicksilver at a depth of 362 miles.
Descending therefore towards the centre through nearly 4000
miles, the condensation of ordinary substances would surpass
the utmost powers of conception. Dr. Young says that steel
would be compressed into one-fourth and stone into one-eighth
of its bulk at the earth’s centre. However, we are yet ignorant
of the laws of compression of solid bodies beyond a certain limit;
from the experiments of Mr. Perkins they appear to be capable
of a greater degree of compression than has generally been
imagined.
But a density so extreme is not borne out by astronomical
observation. It might seem to follow therefore that our planet
must have a widely cavernous structure, and that we tread on a
crust or shell whose thickness bears a very small proportion to
the diameter of its sphere. Possibly, too, this great condensation
at the central regions may be counterbalanced by the increased
elasticity due to a very elevated temperature.</div></body></text></TEI>