<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="29">
282
SECTION XXVIII.

Common or Static Electricity, or Electricity of Tension—A Dual Power—Methods
of exciting it—Attraction and Repulsion—Conduction—Electrics
and Non-electrics—Induction—Dielectrics—Tension—Law
of the Electric Force—Distribution—Laws of Distribution—Heat of
Electricity—Electrical Light and its Spectrum—Velocity—Atmospheric
Electricity—Its cause—Electric Clouds—Violent effects of
Lightning—Back Stroke—Electric Glow—Phosphorescence.
Electricity is a dual power which gives no visible sign of its
existence when in equilibrio, but when elicited forces are developed
capable of producing the most sudden, violent, and destructive
effects in some cases, while in others their action, though
generally less energetic, is of indefinite and uninterrupted continuance.
These modifications of the electric forces, incidentally
depending upon the manner in which they are excited, present
phenomena of great diversity, but yet so connected as to justify
the conclusion that they originate in a common principle. The
hypothesis of electricity being a fluid is untenable in the present
advanced state of the science; we only know that it is a force
whose action is twofold; that bodies in one electric state attract,
and in another repel each other; in the former the electricity is
said to be positive, in the latter negative; and thus regarding it
as a force, its modes of action come under the laws of mechanics
and mathematical analysis.
Electricity may be called into activity by the friction of heterogeneous
substances, as in the common electrifying machine, by
mechanical power, heat, chemical action, and the influence of
magnetism. We are totally ignorant why it is roused from its
neutral state by these means, or of the manner of its existence
in bodies; but when excited it seems to produce a molecular
polarity or chemical change in the ultimate particles of matter.
The science is divided into various branches, of which static
or common electricity comes first under consideration, including
that of the atmosphere. Substances in a neutral state neither
attract nor repel. There is a numerous class called electrics in
283which the electric equilibrium is destroyed by friction; then the
positive and negative electricities are called into action or separated;
the positive is impelled in one direction, and the negative
in another. Electricities of the same kind repel, whereas those
of different kinds attract each other. The attractive power is
exactly equal to the repulsive power at equal distances, and when
not opposed they coalesce with great rapidity and violence, producing
the electric flash, explosion, and shock; then the equilibrium
is restored. One kind of electricity cannot be evolved
without the evolution of an equal quantity of the opposite kind.
Thus when a glass rod is rubbed with a piece of silk, as much
positive electricity is elicited in the glass as there is negative in
the silk. The kind of electricity depends more upon the mechanical
condition than on the nature of the surface; for when
two plates of glass, one polished and the other rough, are rubbed
against each other, the polished surface acquires positive and the
rough negative electricity. The manner in which friction is
performed also alters the kind of electricity. Equal lengths of
black and white ribbon applied longitudinally to one another,
and drawn between the finger and thumb so as to rub their
surfaces together, become electric. When separated the white
ribbon is found to have acquired positive electricity, and the
black negative; but if the whole length of the black ribbon be
drawn across the breadth of the white, the black will be positively
and the white negatively electric when separated. The
friction of the rubber on the glass plate of the electrifying
machine produces abundance of static electricity. The friction
of the steam on the valve of an insulated locomotive steam-engine
produces seven times the quantity of electricity that an
electrifying machine would do with a plate three feet in diameter,
worked at the rate of 70 revolutions in a minute. Pressure
is a source of electricity which M. Becquerel has found to be
common to all bodies; but it is necessary to separate them to
prevent the reunion of the electricities. When two substances
of any kind whatever are insulated and pressed together they
assume different electric states, but they only show contrary
electricities when one of them is a good conductor. When both
are good conductors they must be separated with extreme
rapidity to prevent a return to equilibrium. When the separation
is very sudden the tension of the two electricities may be
284great enough to produce light. M. Becquerel attributes the light
produced by the collision of icebergs to this cause. Iceland
spar is made electric by the smallest pressure between the finger
and the thumb, and retains it for a long time. All these circumstances
are modified by the temperature of the substances,
the state of their surfaces and that of the atmosphere. Several
crystalline bodies become electric when heated, especially tourmaline,
one end of which acquires positive, and the other negative
electricity, while the intermediate part is neutral. If the
tourmaline be broken through the middle, each fragment is found
to possess positive electricity at one end and negative at the
other. Electricity is evolved by substances passing from a liquid
to a solid state, and by chemical action during the production and
condensation of vapour, which is a great source of atmospheric
electricity. In short, it may be generally stated, that when any
cause whatever tends to destroy molecular attraction there is a
development of electricity; if, however, the substances be not
immediately separated, there will be an instantaneous restoration
of equilibrium.
Electricity may be transferred from one body to another in the
same manner as heat is communicated, and like it too the body
loses by the transmission.
Although no substance is altogether impervious to electricity,
nor is there any that does not offer some resistance to its passage,
yet it moves with more facility through a certain class of substances
called conductors, such as metals, water, the human
body, &c., than through atmospheric air, glass, silk, &c., which
are therefore called non-conductors. The conducting power is
affected both by temperature and moisture. The terrestrial
globe is a conductor on account of its moisture, though dry
earth is not. Though metals are the best conductors of electricity,
it affects their molecular structure, for the heat which accompanies
its passage acts as a transverse expansive force, which
increases their breadth by diminishing their length, as may be
seen by passing electricity through a platinum wire sufficiently
thick to resist fusion. Through air the force is disruptive on
account of its non-conducting quality, and it seems to act chemically
on the oxygen, producing the substance known as ozone
during its passage through the atmosphere. If a conductor be
good and of sufficient size the electricity passes imperceptibly
285but it is shivered to pieces in an instant if it be a bad conductor
or too small to carry off the charge. In that case the physical
change is generally a separation of the particles, or expansion
from the heat, as in trees, where it turns the moisture into
steam, but all these effects are in proportion to the obstacles
opposed to the freedom of its course.
Bodies surrounded by non-conductors are said to be insulated,
because when charged the electricity cannot escape. When that
is not the case, the electricity is conveyed to the earth: consequently
it is impossible to accumulate electricity in a conducting
substance that is not insulated. There are a great many substances
called non-electrics in which electricity is not sensibly
developed by friction unless they be insulated, because it is
carried off by their conducting power as soon as elicited. Metals,
for example, which are said to be non-electrics can be excited,
but being conductors they cannot retain this state if in communication
with the earth. It is probable that no bodies exist which
are either perfect non-electrics or perfect non-conductors. But
it is evident that electrics must be non-conductors to a certain
degree, otherwise they could not retain their electric state.
A body charged with electricity, although perfectly insulated,
so that all escape of electricity is prevented, tends to produce an
electric state of the opposite kind in all bodies in its vicinity.
Positive electricity tends to produce negative electricity in a body
near to it, and vice versâ, the effect being greater as the distance
diminishes. This power which electricity possesses of causing an
opposite electrical state in its vicinity is called induction. A
Leyden jar, for example, or glass jar coated half way up both
outside and in with tin foil, when charged with positive electricity,
immediately induces negative electricity on the tin foil
outside. Notwithstanding their strong mutual attraction they
are prevented from coalescing by the glass, which is a non-conductor;
but if the tin inside and out be connected by a conducting
wire they instantly unite. When a body in either electric
state is presented to a neutral one, its tendency in consequence
of the law of induction is to disturb the condition of the neutral
body by inducing electricity contrary to its own in the adjacent
side, and therefore an electrical state similar to its own in the
remote part. Hence the neutrality of the second body is destroyed
by the action of the first, and the adjacent parts of the
286two, having now opposite electricities, will attract each other.
The attraction between electrified and unelectrified substances is
a consequence of the altered state of their molecules. Induction
depends upon the facility with which the equilibrium of the
neutral body can be overcome, a facility which is proportional to
its conducting power. Consequently the attraction exerted by
an electrified substance upon another substance previously
neutral will be much more energetic if the latter be a conductor
than if it be a non-conductor.
It is clear that one body cannot act upon another at a
distance without some means of communication. Dr. Faraday
has proved that the intervening non-conducting substance or
dielectric has a great influence upon induction. Thus the
inductive force is greater when sulphur is interposed between
the two bodies than when shellac is the dielectric, and greater
when shellac is the dielectric than glass, &c. Professor Matteucci
has proved by the following experiment that the intervening substance
is itself polarized by induction. A number of plates of
mica in contact were placed between two plates of metal, one
of which was electrified, so that the whole was charged like a
Leyden jar. On separating the plates with insulating handles,
each plate of mica was electrified; one side of it was positive and
the other negative, showing decidedly a polarization by induction
throughout the whole intervening non-conducting substance; and
thus, although the interposed substance or dielectric is incapable
of conducting the electrical force from one body to the other,
it becomes by induction capable of transmitting it. In the
atmosphere induction is transmitted by that of the intervening
strata of air. It is true that induction takes place through
the most perfect vacuum we can make, but there always remains
some highly elastic air; and even if air could be altogether
excluded, the ethereal medium cannot, and it must be capable of
induction, since, however attenuated, it must consist of material
atoms, otherwise it would be a nonentity.
The law of electrical attraction and repulsion has been
determined by suspending a needle of gum-lac horizontally by a
silk fibre, the needle carrying at one end a piece of electrified
gold leaf. A globe in the same or opposite electrical state when
presented to the gold leaf will repel or attract it, and will therefore
cause the needle to vibrate more or less rapidly according
287to the distance of the globe. A comparison of the number of
oscillations performed in a given time at different distances will
determine the law of the variation of the electrical intensity, in
the same manner that the force of gravitation is measured by
the oscillations of the pendulum. Coulomb invented an instrument
which balances the forces in question by the force of the
torsion of a thread, which consequently measures the intensity;
and Sir William Snow Harris has constructed an instrument
with which he has measured the intensity of the electrical
force in terms of the weight requisite to balance it. By
these methods it has been found that the intensity of electrical
attraction and repulsion varies inversely as the square of the
distance. However, the law of repulsive force is liable to great
disturbances from inductive action, which Sir William Snow
Harris has found to exist not only between a charged and
neutral body, but also between bodies similarly charged; and
that, in the latter case, the inductive process may be indefinitely
modified by the various circumstances of the quantity and
intensity of the electricity and the distance between the charged
bodies.
The quantity of electricity bodies are capable of receiving
does not follow the proportion of their bulk, but depends
principally upon the form and extent of their surface. It
appears from the experiments of Sir W. S. Harris that a
given quantity of electricity, divided between two perfectly
equal and similar bodies, exerts upon external bodies only one
fourth of the attractive force apparent when disposed upon one
of them; and if it be distributed among three equal and similar
bodies, the force is one ninth of that apparent when it is
disposed on one of them. Hence, if the quantity of electricity
be the same, the force varies inversely as the square of the
surface on which it is disposed; and if the surface be the same,
the force varies directly as the square of the quantity of
electricity. These laws however do not hold when the form of
the surface is changed. A given quantity of electricity disposed
on a given surface has the greatest intensity when the surface
has a circular form, and the least intensity when the surface is
expanded into an indefinite straight line. The decrease of
intensity seems to arise from some peculiar arrangement of the
electricity depending on the extension of the surface. It is
288quite independent of the extent of the edge, the area being the
same; for Sir W. S. Harris found that the electrical intensity
of a charged sphere is the same with that of a plane circular
area of the same superficial extent, and that of a charged
cylinder the same as if it were cut open and expanded into a
plane surface.
The same able electrician has shown that the attractive force
between an electrified and a neutral uninsulated body is the
same whatever be the forms of their unopposed parts. Thus
two hemispheres attract each other with precisely the same
force as if they were spheres; and as the force is as the number
of attracting points in operation directly, and as the squares of
the respective distances inversely, it follows that the attraction
between a mere ring and a circular area is no greater than that
between two similar rings, and the force between a sphere and
an opposed spherical segment of the same curvature is no greater
than that of two similar segments, each equal to the given
segment.
Electricity may be accumulated to a great extent in insulated
bodies, and so long as it is quiescent it occasions no sensible
change in their properties. When restrained by the non-conducting
power of the atmosphere, its tension or the pressure it
exerts is proportional to the coercive force of the air. If the
pressure be less than the coercive force, the electricity is
retained; but the instant it exceeds that force in any one point
it escapes, and that more readily when the air is attenuated or
saturated with moisture, for the resistance of the air is proportional
to the square of its density, but the inductive action
of electricity on distant bodies is independent of atmospheric
pressure. The power of retaining electricity depends also on
the shape of the charged body. It is most easily retained by a
sphere, next to that by a spheroid, but it readily escapes from a
point, and a pointed object receives it with most facility.
The heat produced by the electric shock is proportional to
the square of the quantity of electricity discharged, and is so
intense that it fuses metals and volatilizes substances, but its
intensity is not felt to its full extent on account of the shortness
of its duration. It is only accompanied by light when the
electricity is obstructed in its passage through substance.
Electrical light when analysed by a prism differs very much
289from solar light. Fraunhofer found that, instead of the fixed dark
lines, the spectrum of an electric spark is crossed by numerous
bright lines; and Professor Wheatstone has observed that the
number and position of the lines differ with the metal from
which the spark is taken, and believes the spark itself results
from the ignition and volatilization of the matter of the conductor.
According to the experiments of Sir Humphry Davy, the
density of the air has an influence on the colour. He passed the
electric spark through a vacuum over mercury, which from green
became successively sea-green, blue, and purple, on admitting
different quantities of air. When the vacuum was made over
a fusible alloy of tin and bismuth, the spark was yellowish and
extremely pale. Sir Humphry thence concluded that electrical
light principally depends upon some properties belonging to the
ponderable matter through which it passes, and that space is
capable of exhibiting luminous appearances, though it does not
contain an appreciable quantity of matter. He thought that the
superficial particles of bodies which form vapour, when detached
by the repulsive power of heat, might be equally separated by
the electric forces, and produce luminous appearances in vacuo
by the destruction of their opposite electric states.
The velocity of electricity is so great that the most rapid
motion which can be produced by art appears to be actual rest
when compared with it. A wheel revolving with celerity sufficient
to render its spokes invisible, when illuminated by a flash
of lightning, is seen for an instant with all its spokes distinct, as
if it were in a state of absolute repose; because, however rapid
the rotation may be, the light has come and already ceased before
the wheel has had time to turn through a sensible space. This
beautiful experiment is due to Professor Wheatstone, as well as
the following variation of it, which is not less striking: If a
circular piece of pasteboard be divided into three sectors, one of
which is painted blue, another yellow, and a third red, it will
appear to be white when revolving quickly, because of the
rapidity with which the impressions of the colours succeed each
other on the retina. But, the instant it is illuminated by an
electric spark, it seems to stand still, and each colour is as distinct
as if it were at rest. This transcendent speed of electricity has
290been ingeniously measured, as follows, by Professor Wheatstone,
who has ascertained that it much surpasses the velocity of
light.
In the horizontal diameter of a small disc, fixed on the wall
of a darkened room, are disposed six small brass balls, well insulated
from each other. An insulated copper wire, half a mile
long, is disjointed in its middle, and also near its two extremities;
the six ends thus obtained are connected with the six-balls on the
disc. When an electric discharge is sent through the wire by
connecting its two extremities, one with the positive, and the
other with the negative coating of a Leyden jar, three sparks are
seen on the disc, apparently at the same instant. At the distance
of about ten feet a small revolving mirror is placed so as
to reflect these three sparks during its revolution. From the
extreme velocity of the electricity, it is clear that, if the three
sparks be simultaneous, they will be reflected, and will vanish
before the mirror has sensibly changed its position, however rapid
its rotation may be, and they will be seen in a straight line.
But if the three sparks be not simultaneously transmitted to the
disc—if one, for example, be later than the other two—the mirror
will have time to revolve through an indefinitely small arc in
the interval between the reflection of the two sparks and that of
the single one. However, the only indication of this small
motion of the mirror will be, that the single spark will not be
reflected in the same straight line with the other two, but a little
above or below it, for the reflection of all three will still be
apparently simultaneous, the time intervening being much too
short to be appreciated.
Since the number of revolutions which the revolving mirror
makes in a second is known, and the angular deviation of the
reflection of the single spark from the reflection of the other two
can be measured, the time elapsed between their consecutive reflections
can be ascertained. And, as the length of that part of
the wire through which the electricity has passed is given, its
velocity may be found.
The number of pulses in a second, requisite to produce a musical
note of any pitch, are known; hence the number of revolutions
accomplished by the mirror in a given time may be determined
from the musical note produced by a tooth or peg, in its axis of
291rotation, striking against a card, or from the notes of a siren
attached to the axis. It was thus that Professor Wheatstone
found the mirror which he employed in his experiments made
800 revolutions in a second; and, as the angular velocity of the
reflected image in a revolving mirror is double that of the mirror
itself, an angular deviation of one degree in the appearance of
the two sparks would indicate an interval of the 576,000th of a
second; the deviation of half a degree would, therefore, indicate
more than the millionth of a second. The use of sound as a
measure of velocity is a happy illustration of the connexion of
the physical sciences.
The earth possesses a powerful electrical tension, and the atmosphere
when clear is almost always positively electric. Its electricity
is stronger in winter than in summer, during the day
than in the night. The intensity increases for two or three
hours from the time of sunrise, comes to a maximum between
seven and eight, then decreases towards the middle of the day,
arrives at its minimum between one and two, and again augments
as the sun declines till about the time of sunset, after which it
diminishes and continues feeble during the night. The mere
condensation of vapour is a source of atmospheric electricity; but
although it is also produced by the vapour that rises from the
surface of the earth, it is not under all circumstances. M. Pouillet
found that electricity is only developed when accompanied by
chemical action: for example, when the water whence the vapour
proceeds contains lime, chalk, or any solid alkali, negative electricity
is produced; and when it holds in solution either gas, acid,
or some of the salts, the vapour is positively electric. Besides, the
contact of earth with salt and fresh water generates positive electricity,
and the contact of fresh and salt currents of water
negative, so that the ocean must afford a great supply to the
atmosphere; hence thunderstorms are most frequent near the
coasts: but as electricity of one kind or another is developed
whenever the molecules of matter are deranged from their natural
state of equilibrium, there must be many partial variations in the
electric state of the air. When the invisible vapour rises charged
with electricity into the cold regions of the atmosphere, it is
condensed into cloud, in which the tension is increased because
the electricity is confined to a smaller space; and if the condensation
292be sufficient to produce drops of rain, they carry the
electricity to the ground, so that in general a shower is a conductor
between the clouds and the earth. When two clouds
charged with opposite kinds, but of equal tension, approach within
a certain distance, the intensity increases on the sides of the clouds
that are nearest to one another; and when the tension is great
enough to overcome the coercive pressure of the atmosphere, a
discharge takes place which causes a flash of lightning, the stroke
being given either by the cloud or the rain. The actual quantity
of electricity in any part of a cloud is extremely small. The
intensity of the flash arises from the great extent of surface
over which it is spread, so that clouds may be compared to
enormous Leyden jars thinly coated with electricity, which only
acquires its intensity by its instantaneous condensation. The
rapid and irregular motions of thunder clouds are probably more
owing to strong electrical attractions and repulsions among themselves
than to currents of air, though both are no doubt concerned
in these hostile movements. The atmosphere becomes
intensely electric on the approach of rain, hail, snow, sleet, and
wind; but it varies afterwards, and the transitions are very rapid
on the approach of a thunderstorm.
Since air is a non-conductor, it does not convey the electricity
from the clouds to the earth, but it acquires from them an opposite
kind, and when the tension is very great the force of the
electricity becomes irresistible, and an interchange takes place
between the clouds and the earth; but so rapid is the motion of
lightning, that it is difficult to ascertain whether it goes from the
clouds to the earth or shoots upwards from the earth to the
clouds, though there can be no doubt that it does both. In a
storm that occurred at Manchester in June 1835, the lightning
was observed to issue from various points of a road, attended by
explosions as if pistols had been fired out of the ground, and a
man seems to have been killed by one of these explosions taking
place under his foot. M. Gay Lussac ascertained that a flash of
lightning sometimes darts more than three miles in a straight
line. A person may be killed by lightning, although the explosion
takes place at a distance of twenty miles, by what is called
the back stroke. Suppose that the two extremities of a highly
charged cloud hang down towards the earth, they will repel the
293electricity from the earth’s surface if it be of the same kind with
their own, and will attract the other kind; and if a discharge
should suddenly take place at one end of the cloud, the equilibrium
will be instantly restored by a flash at that point of the
earth which is under the other. Though the back stroke is often
sufficiently powerful to destroy life, it is never so terrible in its
effects as the direct stroke, which is often of inconceivable intensity.
Instances have occurred when large masses of iron and stone,
and even many feet of a stone wall, have been carried to a considerable
distance by a stroke of lightning. Rocks and the tops
of mountains often bear the marks of fusion from its intense
heat; and occasionally vitreous tubes descending many feet into
banks of sand mark its path. Dr. Fiedler exhibited several of
these fulgorites in London of considerable length, which had been
dug out of the sandy plains of Silesia and Eastern Prussia. One
found at Paderborn was forty feet long. Their ramifications
generally terminate in pools or springs of water below the sand,
which are supposed to determine the course of the lightning.
No doubt the soil and substrata must influence its direction, since
it is found by experience that places which have been once struck
by lightning are often struck again. An insulated conductor on
the approach of a storm gives out such quantities of sparks that
it is dangerous to approach it, as was fatally experienced by
Professor Richman at Petersburg, who was struck dead by a
globe of fire from the extremity of a conductor, while making
experiments on atmospheric electricity. Copper conductors afford
the best protection, especially if they expose a broad surface,
since electricity is conveyed along the surface of bodies. There
is no instance of an electric cloud of high tension being dispelled
by a conductor, yet those invented by Sir William Snow Harris,
and universally employed in the navy, afford a complete protection
in the most imminent danger. The Shannon, a 50-gun
frigate, commanded by the brave and lamented Sir William Peel,
was enveloped in a thunder-storm when about 90 miles to the
north-west of Java. It began at fifty minutes past four in the
afternoon; the ship was driven before the storm, in a high sea,
amid streams of vivid lightning, deafening thunder, hail, and
rain. At five o’clock an immense ball of fire covered the maintopgallant
mast, ran up the royal pole, and exploded in the air
with a terrific concussion, covering all the surrounding space
294with sparks of electric light, which were driven rapidly to leeward
by the wind. Fifteen minutes later an immense mass of
lightning struck the mainmast, attended by a violent gust of
wind; and another heavy discharge fell on it a quarter of an
hour afterwards. From that time till six o’clock the ship was
continually encompassed by sharp forked lightning, accompanied
by incessant peals of thunder. Though actually enveloped in
electricity, and struck three times, neither the hull nor the
rigging sustained the slightest injury.
When the air is rarefied by heat, its coercive power is diminished,
so that the electricity escapes from the clouds in those
lambent diffuse flashes without thunder so frequent in warm
summer evenings; and when the atmosphere is highly charged with
electricity, it not unfrequently happens that electric light, in
the form of a star, is seen on the topmasts and yard-arms of ships.
In 1831 the French officers at Algiers were surprised to see
brushes of light on the heads of their comrades, and at the points
of their fingers when they held up their hands. This phenomenon
was well known to the ancients, who reckoned it a lucky omen.
Many substances, in decaying, emit light, which is attributed
to electricity, such as fish and rotten wood. Oyster-shells, and
a variety of minerals, become phosphorescent at certain temperatures
when exposed to electric shocks or friction: indeed, most
of the causes which disturb molecular equilibrium give rise to
phosphoric phenomena. The minerals possessing this property
are generally coloured or imperfectly transparent; and, though
the colour of this light varies in different substances, it has no
fixed relation to the colour of the mineral. An intense heat
entirely destroys this property, and the phosphorescent light developed
by heat has no connexion with light produced by friction;
for Sir David Brewster observed that bodies deprived of
the faculty of emitting the one are still capable of giving out the
other. Among the bodies which generally become phosphorescent
when exposed to heat, there are some specimens which do
not possess this property; wherefore phosphorescence cannot be
regarded as an essential character of the minerals possessing it.
Sulphuret of calcium, known as Canton’s phosphorus, and the
sulphuret of barium, or Bologna stone, possess the phosphorescent
property in an eminent degree.
Multitudes of fish are endowed with the power of emitting
295light at pleasure, no doubt to enable them to pursue their prey
at depths where the sunbeams cannot penetrate. Flashes of light
are frequently seen to dart along a shoal of herrings or pilchards;
and the Medusa tribes are noted for their phosphorescent brilliancy,
many of which are extremely small, and so numerous as
to make the wake of a vessel look like a stream of silver.
Nevertheless, the luminous appearance which is frequently observed
in the sea during the summer months cannot always be
attributed to marine animalculæ, as the following narrative will
show:—
Captain Bonnycastle, coming up the Gulf of St. Lawrence
on the 7th of September, 1826, was roused by the mate of the
vessel in great alarm from an unusual appearance. It was
a starlight night, when suddenly the sky became overcast in
the direction of the high land, and an instantaneous and intensely
vivid light, resembling the aurora, shot out of the
hitherto gloomy and dark sea on the lee bow, which was so brilliant
that it lighted everything distinctly even to the mast-head.
The light spread over the whole sea between the two shores, and
the waves, which before had been tranquil, now began to be agitated.
Captain Bonnycastle describes the scene as that of a
blazing sheet of awful and most brilliant light. A long and
vivid line of light, superior in brightness to the parts of the sea
not immediately near the vessel, showed the base of the high,
frowning, and dark land abreast; the sky became lowering and
more intensely obscure. Long tortuous lines of light showed
immense numbers of very large fish darting about as if in consternation.
The sprit-sail yard and mizen-boom were lighted
by the glare, as if gaslights had been burning directly below
them; and until just before daybreak, at four o’clock, the most
minute objects were distinctly visible. Day broke very slowly,
and the sun rose of a fiery and threatening aspect. Rain followed.
Captain Bonnycastle caused a bucket of this fiery water
to be drawn up; it was one mass of light when stirred by the
hand, and not in sparks as usual, but in actual coruscations. A
portion of the water preserved its luminosity for seven nights.
On the third night, the scintillations of the sea reappeared; the
sun went down very singularly, exhibiting in its descent a
double sun; and, when only a few degrees high, its spherical
figure changed into that of a long cylinder, which reached the
296horizon. In the night the sea became nearly as luminous as
before, but on the fifth night the appearance entirely ceased.
Captain Bonnycastle did not think it proceeded from animalculæ,
but imagined it might be some compound of phosphorus, suddenly
evolved and disposed over the surface of the sea. It
had probably been that peculiar form of electricity known as the
glow discharge, of which the author once saw a very remarkable
instance.
M. E. Becquerel assures us that almost all substances are
phosphorescent after being exposed to the sun if instantly withdrawn
into darkness, and that it depends upon the arrangement
of the particles and not upon chemical action. The salts of
uranium give the same kind of phosphorescent light as that produced
by the violet rays of the solar spectrum. A solution of the
bisulphate of quinine emits a yellow phosphorescent light, whereas
the fluorescent light of that liquid is blue. The colours of these
two kinds of light are generally complementary to one another.
Phosphorescence is probably more or less concerned in some, at
least, of a series of very curious experiments made by M. Niepcé
de Saint-Victor, on what he calls the saturation of substances with
light. It has long been known that, if a person in an intensely
dark room should expose his arm to the sun through a hole in a
window-shutter, it will shine on being drawn into the darkness.
Now, M. de Saint-Victor found that if an engraving be exposed
for a certain time to the sun, and instantly brought into darkness,
it will make a photographic impression on a collodion or argentine
surface, and that anything written or drawn with tartaric
acid, or a solution of the salts of uranium, in large characters, is
reproduced even at a small distance from a sensitive surface. It
may be presumed that the light communicates its vibrations to
the surfaces exposed to it with sufficient force to enable them to
disturb the unstable equilibrium of such sensitive substances as
collodion or the argentine salts. M. de Saint-Victor has shown
that tartaric acid, which is readily impressed by sunlight, is
neither fluorescent nor phosphorescent, whence he concludes that
his experiments are independent of both of these modes of action.
Uranium appears to have very peculiar properties: its salts are
strongly luminous when exposed to the sun; they are very fluorescent;
and the crystallized azitote of uranium becomes phosphorescent
by percussion.</div></body></text></TEI>