<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="37">
384
SECTION XXXVI.

The Fixed Stars—Their Number—The Milky Way—Double Stars—Binary
Systems—Their Orbits and Periodic Times—Colours of the
Stars—Stars that have vanished—Variable Stars—Variation in Sun’s
Light—Parallax and Distances of the Fixed Stars—Masses of the Stars—Comparative
Light of the Stars—Proper Motions of the Stars—Apparent
Motions of the Stars—Motion and Velocity of the Sun and
Solar System—The Nebulæ—Their Number—Catalogue of them—Consist
of Two Classes—Diffuse Nebulæ—Definitely formed Nebulæ—Globular
Clusters—Splendour of Milky Way—Distribution of the
Nebulæ—The Magellanic Clouds—Nebulæ round η Argûs—Constitution
of Nebulæ, and the Forces that maintain them—Meteorites and
Shooting Stars.
Great as the number of comets appears to be, it is absolutely
nothing in comparison of the multitude of the fixed stars. About
2000 only are visible to the naked eye; but when the heavens
are viewed through a telescope, their number seems to be limited
only by the imperfection of the instrument. The number registered
amounts to 200,000; their places are determined with
great precision, and they are formed into a catalogue, not only
for the purpose of ascertaining geographical positions by the
occultations of the brightest among them, but also to serve as
points of reference for marking the places of comets and other
celestial phenomena. Sirius, α Centauri, and Arcturus are the
brightest stars in the heavens; the others are classed according
to their apparent lustre, from the first to the seventeenth magnitudes.
Capella, α Lyræ, Procyon, and twenty or twenty-one
more, are of the first magnitude; α Persei, γ Orionis, α Cygni,
and in all fifty or sixty, are of the second; and of the third there
are about 200, such as η Bootis and η Draconis, the numbers
increasing as the magnitude diminishes. Those of the eighth
magnitude are scarcely visible to the naked eye, and it requires
a very good telescope to see stars of the seventeenth. This
sequence is perfectly arbitrary; but Sir John Herschel has ascertained
by actual measurement the comparative lustre of a great
many—for example, he found that the light of a star of the sixth
385magnitude is 100 times less than that of one of the first magnitude,
and that Sirius would make between three and four
hundred of such little stars. Were the photometric scale completed,
it would be of the greatest importance with regard to the
variable stars.
The three or four brightest classes of stars are scattered pretty
equably over the sky, with the exception of a zone or belt following
the course of the great circle passing through ε Orionis
and α Crucis, where they are very numerous, especially in the
southern hemisphere. The stars of all magnitudes visible to
the naked eye increase in numbers towards the borders of the
Milky Way, which derives its lustre and name from the diffused
light of myriads of stars; so numerous are they in some parts
of it that more than 50,000 passed through the field of Sir
William Herschel’s telescope in the course of an hour, in a zone
only two degrees broad; in many places they are numerous
beyond estimation, and most of them are extremely small on
account of their enormous distances.
The Milky Way, which forms so conspicuous a part of the
firmament, is a vast and somewhat flattened stratum or congeries
of stars, encircling the heavens in a broad band, split
through one part of its circumference into two streams of stars,
bearing a strong resemblance to fig. 5, plate 5. It is contorted
and broken in some places, and occasionally lengthened into
branches stretching far into space. Its thickness is small compared
with its length and breadth; yet in some places it is unfathomable
even with the best telescopes; in others there is
reason to believe that it is possible to see through it, and even
beyond it, in its own plane. There is a gradual but rapid increase
in the crowding of the stars on each side of the flat stratum
towards the centre.
The solar system is deeply though excentrically plunged into
this mass of stars, near that point where the circular stratum
splits into two streams. Sir John Herschel’s description of the
stars of the southern hemisphere shows that the Milky Way is
a most magnificent object there. “The general aspect of the
southern circumpolar regions (including in that expression 60°
or 70° of south polar distance) is in a high degree rich and magnificent,
owing to the superior brilliancy and large development
of the Milky Way, which, from the constellation of Orion to
386that of Antinous, is a blaze of light, strangely interrupted, however,
with vacant and entirely starless patches, especially in
Scorpio, near α Centauri and the Cross, while to the north it
fades away pale and dim, and is in comparison hardly traceable.
I think it is impossible to view this splendid zone, with the
astonishingly rich and evenly distributed fringe of stars of the
3rd and 4th magnitude, which forms a broad skirt to its southern
border like a vast curtain, without an impression amounting
almost to conviction, that the Milky Way is not a mere stratum,
but annular, or at least that our system is placed within one of
the poorer or almost vacant parts of its general mass, and that
eccentrically, so as to be much nearer to the region about the
Cross than to that diametrically opposite to it.”
Those dark vacuities called “Coal Sacks” by the ancient
navigators, which are so numerous between α Centauri and
α Antaris, are among the most extraordinary phenomena in the
southern hemisphere; they are of intense blackness, though by
no means void of extremely small telescopic stars; the darkness
arises from the contrast these nearly vacant spaces form with
the excessive brilliancy of the surrounding part of the Milky
Way, and the sudden sharp transition from light to darkness.
The largest and most conspicuous of them is a pear-shaped
vacuity close to the Southern Cross. That portion of the Milky
Way that is split longitudinally through its centre lies between
α Centauri and the constellation of Cygnus: the two bands are
joined here and there by narrow bridges of condensed stars,
stretching across the darker space between them. In Scorpio
and Sagittarius Sir John Herschel describes the Milky Way as
composed of definite clouds of light running into clusters of
extremely minute stars like sand, not strewed evenly as with a
sieve, but as if thrown down by handfuls, and by both hands at
once, leaving dark intervals. In this astonishing profusion the
stars are of all sizes, from the 14th to the 20th magnitude, and
even down to nebulosity. After an interval the same profusion
is renewed, the stars being inconceivably minute and numerous
beyond description—they are in millions and millions. Thus
there is great irregularity in their diffusion as well as magnitude—in
some places intensely crowded, in others the deep blackness
of the sky, over which they are thinly scattered, irresistibly led
to believe that in these regions the power of our telescopes fairly
387penetrates through the starry stratum, and beyond it. Sometimes
we look through a sheet of stars nearly of the same size, of no
great thickness compared with their distance from us, and not
unfrequently there is a double stratum, one of large stars spread
over another of very small ones.
The most southerly of the two streams of stars which form
the Milky Way in this part of the firmament maintains an
unbroken course of extreme brilliancy, containing some of the
finest clusters of stars in the heavens. One round γ Sagittarii
is an intense aggregate of stars, in some parts of which
they are so crowded as to exceed enumeration; at a very moderate
estimate Sir John Herschel thinks this group cannot contain
fewer than a hundred thousand stars. Other two groups between
the constellations of the Shield and Ophiuchus stand out
like promontories of intense brilliancy in the dark space that
separates the starry streams of the Milky Way.
The distance of the fixed stars is too great to admit of their
exhibiting a sensible disc, but they must be spherical if gravitation
pervades all space, as there is every reason to believe it does.
With a powerful telescope the stars are like points of light: their
occultations by the moon are therefore instantaneous. Their
twinkling arises from sudden changes in the refractive power of
the air, which would not be sensible if they had discs like planets.
Thus nothing can be known of their distance from us or from
one another by their apparent diameters. Although from the
appearance of the stars no inference can be drawn as to their
distance, yet among the multitudes in the heavens a few are
found near enough to exhibit distinct parallactic motions arising
from the revolution of the earth in its orbit, from whence their
distance from the sun has been computed: α Centauri, the
brightest star in the southern hemisphere, is a very remarkable
instance. Professor Henderson at the Cape of Good Hope determined
its parallax to be 1ʺ by a series of observations on its position
at opposite periods of the year, that is, from opposite points
in the earth’s orbit. The result was afterwards confirmed by Mr.
Maclear, who found the amount to be 0ʺ·913. The difference
between the two is wonderfully small, considering the many unavoidable
sources of error in the determination of such minute
quantities (N. 230).
Since no star in the northern hemisphere has so great an amount
388of parallax, an arc of 1ʺ is assumed as the parallactic unit. Now
radius is to the sine of 1ʺ as 206,265 is to 1; hence, α Centauri
is 206,265 times more distant from the sun than the sun is
from the earth. Light flying at the rate of 192,000 miles in a
second must take 3 years and 83 days to come to us from that
star.
One or two tenths of a second becomes a very great error when
the maximum amount of parallax is only 1ʺ, and on that account,
with the exception of α Centauri, it has been found impracticable
to determine the annual changes in the apparent motions of
single stars affected by precession, nutation, aberration, and the
variations of temperature of the instruments used in observing.
However, as two stars in juxtaposition are equally affected by all
of these; the difference in their motions is independent of them.
Of two stars apparently in close approximation, one may be far
behind the other in space. They may seem near to one another
when viewed from the earth in one part of its orbit, but may
separate widely when seen from the earth in another position, just
as two terrestrial objects appear to be one when viewed in the
same straight line, but separate as the observer changes his position.
In this case the stars would not have real, but only apparent
motion. One of them would seem to oscillate annually to and
fro in a straight line on each side of the other, a motion that
could not be mistaken for that of a binary system where one star
describes an ellipse about the other; or if the edge of the orbit
be turned towards the earth, where the oscillations require years
for their accomplishment. The only circumstances that can
affect the stars unequally, and which must be eliminated, are the
proper motion of the stars in space, and specific aberration, a very
minute quantity arising from peculiarities in the star’s light.
This method of finding the distances of the fixed stars was proposed
by Galileo and attempted by Dr. Long without success.
Sir William Herschel afterwards applied it to some of the binary
groups; and although he did not find the thing he sought for, it
led to the discovery of the orbital motions of the double stars.
M. Struve was the first to apply this method, and that in a
very difficult case. He perceived that a very small star is close
to α Lyræ, and by a series of most accurate differential measurements
from 1835 to 1838 he found that α Lyræ has a parallax of
0ʺ·261, which was afterwards corroborated by the observations of
389M. Peters; hence α Lyræ is 789,600 times more distant from the
sun than the earth is.
It was natural to suppose that in general the large stars are
nearer to the earth than the small ones; but there is now reason
to believe that some stars, though by no means brilliant, are nearer
to us than others which shine with greater splendour. This is
inferred from the comparative velocity of their proper motions;
all the stars have a general motion of translation, which tends
ultimately to mix those of the different constellations; but none
that we know of moves so rapidly as 61 Cygni, and on that
account it was reckoned to be nearer to us than any other,
for an object seems to move more quickly the nearer it is. Now
M. Bessel saw that two minute and probably very remote stars
are very near 61 Cygni, their directions from that star being at
right angles to one another; so that, during the revolution of the
earth, one of these distances was a maximum and the other a
minimum alternately every three months. This alternation,
although it indicated a parallax or difference of parallaxes of
only 0ʺ·348, was maintained with such perfect regularity every
three months, that it leaves not a doubt of its accuracy, which
was afterwards confirmed by the observations of M. Peters at
Polkova. It follows from that small parallax that 61 Cygni
must be 592,700 times farther from the earth than the sun is—a
distance that light would not pass over in less than nine years
and three months.
Mr. Henderson found the parallax of Sirius, the brightest of
all the stars, to be only 0ʺ·230; it is consequently more distant
than 61 Cygni, though the latter is but of the 6th magnitude.
M. Argelander has calculated that the apparent magnitude of
the stars depends upon their distance. Supposing them all to
be of the same size, the smallest visible in Sir William Herschel’s
20 feet reflecting telescope, namely those of the 17th magnitude,
would be 228 times farther off than those of the first magnitude;
and M. Peters of Polkova from the annual parallax of thirty-five,
seven of which are now very accurately determined, has ascertained
the distance of the nearest of them to be such, that light
flying at the rate of 95 millions of miles in a second would take
15 years and a half to come from them to the earth, and that a
star of the 17th magnitude might be extinguished for 3541 years
before we should be aware of it. (N. 231.)
390The great gulfs that separate the stars from the sun, and
probably from one another, no doubt maintain the stability of
the stellar system, in the same manner that in the solar system
the distances of the planets from the sun and the satellites from
their primaries are so arranged as to preserve their mutual disturbances
within due limits. The stars supposed to be nearest
the sun are probably in a great zone which crosses the Milky
Way between η Argûs and α Crucis. It comprises the bright
stars of the constellations Orion, Canis Major, the Southern Cross,
Centaur, Lupus, and Scorpio. The axis of the zone is inclined
at an angle of 20° to the medial line, or circle, passing through
the centre of the Milky Way.
A very great number of stars undergo periodical changes of
lustre, varying in some cases from complete extinction to their
original brilliancy, strongly suggesting the idea that they are
temporarily obscured, and sometimes completely hid, by opaque
bodies revolving round them in regular periodic times, as the
planets do about the sun.
The star Mira, or ω Ceti, which was first noticed to be periodical
by Fabricius, in 1596, appears about twelve times in eleven
years, or in periods of 331d 8h 4m 16s; it remains at its greatest
brightness about a fortnight, being then on some occasions equal
to a large star of the second magnitude; then it decreases during
about three months, till it becomes completely invisible to the
naked eye, in which state it remains about five months; after
that it continues increasing during the remainder of its period.
Such is the general course of its changes; but it does not always
return to the same degree of brightness, nor increase and diminish
by the same gradations, neither are the successive intervals
of its maxima equal. From the observations and investigations
of M. Argelander, the mean period given is subject to fluctuation,
embracing 88 such periods, and having the effect of gradually
lengthening and shortening alternately those intervals to the
extent of 25 days one way and the other. The irregularities in
the degree of brightness attained at the maximum are probably
also periodical. For four years previous to 1676 it did not
appear at all; and on October 5, 1839, it exceeded α Ceti, and
equalled β Aurigæ, in lustre. These irregularities may be occasioned
by periodical perturbations among opaque bodies revolving
about the star. Algol, or β Persei, is another very remarkable
391instance of a variable star. It has the size of a star of the second
magnitude for two days and thirteen and a half hours, and then
suddenly begins to diminish in splendour, till, in about three hours
and a half, it is reduced to the size of a star of the fourth magnitude;
it then begins again to increase, and in three hours and
a half more regains its brightness, going through all these vicissitudes
in 2d 20h 48m 54s·7. Sir John Herschel and Mr. Goodricke,
by whom the variable nature of this star was discovered in 1782,
considered this to be a case strongly indicative of the revolution
of an opaque body, which, coming between us and Algol, cuts
off a large portion of the light. This star has been constantly
observed, and the more recent observations, compared with the
ancient ones, indicated a diminution in the periodic time. It is
even proved that this decrease is not uniformly progressive, but
is actually proceeding with accelerated rapidity, which, however,
will probably not continue, but will by degrees relax, and then be
changed into increase, according to the laws of periodicity, which,
as well as their causes, remain to be discovered. The first minimum
of this star, in 1844, happened on January 3rd, at 4h 14m
Greenwich time. γ Hydræ also vanishes and reappears every 494
days. β Lyræ was discovered to be variable, in 1784, by Mr.
Goodricke, and its period was ascertained by Argelander to be
12d 21h 53m 10s, in which time a double maximum and minimum
takes place, the two maxima being nearly equal, but the
two minima unequal; besides these semi-periods, there is a slow
aberration of period, which appears to be periodical itself: from
its discovery to 1840 the time was continually lengthening, but
more and more slowly, till, in 1840, it ceased to increase, and has
since been slowly on the decrease.
The stars δ Cephei and η Aquilæ, or Antinoi, were discovered
to be variable in 1784; their respective periods, being 5d 8h 47m 39s
and 7d 4h 13m 53s, have since been accurately determined. Besides
these, the variations of between 30 and 40 have been approximately
ascertained, and a great many more among the smaller stars have
been discovered to be variable by Mr. Hind, who has remarked
that many of those stars which continue visible at their minimum
appear hazy and indistinct, as though some cloudy or nebulous
medium intervened. Some of the variable stars are red, and
others present successive changes through blue, yellow, and red.
When the brightness is increasing the star has a blueish tinge,
392when it is past its maximum lustre it assumes a yellow tint, and
while on its decrease it becomes ruddy with flashes of bright
red light. These changes are very marked in a small star near
the star 77, at the extremity of the south wing of Virgo.
Sir John Herschel, after having described the glory of the
starry heavens, asks, “For what purpose are we to suppose such
magnificent bodies scattered through the abyss of space? Surely
not to illuminate our nights, which an additional moon of the
thousandth part the size of our own would do much better, nor
to sparkle as a pageant void of meaning and reality, and bewilder
us with vain conjectures. Useful, it is true, they are to man
as points of exact and permanent reference; but he must have
studied astronomy to little purpose who can suppose man to be
the only object of his Creator’s care, or who does not see in the
vast and wonderful apparatus around us provision for other races
of animated beings. The planets, we have seen, derive their
light from the sun, but that cannot be the case with the stars.
These doubtless then are themselves suns, and may perhaps,
each in its sphere, be the presiding centre round which other
planets or bodies, of which we can form no conception from any
analogy offered by our own system, may be circulating.”
Another circumstance shows how probable it is that dark
bodies are revolving among the stars. The proper motion of
Sirius is very irregular—sometimes it is rapid, and at other times
slow; the cause is ascribed by MM. Bessel and Peters to a dark
companion which revolves with Sirius about their common centre
of gravity, and by its attraction disturbs the equable motion of
the star.
Sometimes stars have all at once appeared, shone with a bright
light, and vanished. Several instances of these temporary stars
are on record. A remarkable one occurred in the year 125,
which is said to have induced Hipparchus to form the first catalogue
of stars. Another star appeared suddenly near α Aquilæ
in the year 389, which vanished after remaining for three weeks
as bright as Venus. On the 10th of October, 1604, a brilliant
star burst forth in the constellation of Serpentarius, which continued
visible for a year; and on the 11th of November, 1572, a
star all at once shone forth in Cassiopeia, which rapidly increased
in brightness till it surpassed that of Jupiter so much as
to be visible at midday. It began to decrease in December of
393the same year, and, in March, 1574, it had entirely disappeared,
having exhibited a variety of tints. It is suspected, however,
that this star is periodically variable and identical with stars
which appeared in the years 945 and 1264. A more recent case
occurred in the year 1670, when a new star was discovered in
the head of the Swan, which, after becoming invisible, reappeared,
and, having undergone many variations in light, vanished after
two years, and has never since been seen. On the 28th of April,
1848, Mr. Hind discovered a star of the 5th magnitude in the
constellation Ophiuchus, which was very conspicuous to the
naked eye, and where he was certain no star even so bright as
the 9th magnitude had ever existed, nor was there any record
of such a star. From the time of its discovery it continued to
diminish till it became extinct. Its colour was ruddy, and was
thought to undergo remarkable changes, probably an effect of its
low position, as its polar distance was 102° 39ʹ 14ʺ.
Sir John Herschel discovered very singular variations in the
star η of the constellation Argo. It is surrounded by a wonderful
nebula, and between the years 1677 and 1826 it varied twice
from the 4th to the 2nd magnitude; but in the beginning of
1838 it suddenly increased in lustre, so as to be nearly as bright
as α Centauri. Thence it diminished, but not below the first
magnitude till April 1843, when it had again increased, so as to
surpass Canopus, and nearly equal Sirius in splendour. With
regard to this singular phenomenon, Sir John Herschel observes,
that “Temporary stars heretofore recorded have all become totally
extinct. Variable stars, as far as they have been carefully attended
to, have exhibited periodical and regular alternations (in
some degree at least) of splendour and comparative obscurity;
but here we have a star fitfully variable to an astonishing extent,
and whose fluctuations are spread over centuries, apparently in no
settled period, and in no regular progression. What origin can we
ascribe to these sudden flashes and relapses? What conclusions
are we to draw as to the comfort or habitability of a system depending
for its supply of light and heat on so variable a source?
Its future career will be a subject of high physical interest. To
this account I will only add, that in the beginning of 1838 the
brightness of this star was so great as materially to interfere
with the observations of that part of the nebula surrounding it.”
Sir John has also discovered that α Orionis is variable, a circumstance
394the more remarkable as it is one of the conspicuous stars
of our hemisphere, and yet its changes had never been remarked.
The inferences Sir John draws from the phenomena of variable
stars are too interesting not to be given in his own words. “A
periodic change existing to so great an extent in so large and
brilliant a star as α Orionis cannot fail to awaken attention to the
subject, and to revive the consideration of those speculations
respecting the possibility of a change in the lustre of our sun
itself, which were first put forth by my father. If there be really
a community of nature between the sun and the fixed stars,
every proof that we obtain of the extensive prevalence of such
periodical changes in those remote bodies adds to the probability
of finding something of the kind nearer home. If our sun were
ever intrinsically much brighter than at present, the mean temperature
of the surface of our globe would of course be proportionally
greater. I speak now not of periodical, but secular
changes. But the argument is complicated with the consideration
of the possible imperfect transparency of space, which may be
due to material non-luminous particles, diffused irregularly in
patches analogous to nebulæ, but of great extent—to cosmical
clouds, in short, of whose existence we have, I think, some indication
in the singular and apparently capricious phenomena of
temporary stars, and perhaps in the recent extraordinary increase,
and hardly less sudden diminution, of η Argûs.” Mr. Hind has
come to the same conclusion with Goodricke and Sir John
Herschel, that the changes in the variable stars are owing to
opaque bodies revolving round them; indeed there are strong
reasons to believe that there are solar systems analogous to our
own in the remote regions of space. Our sun requires nine
times the period of Algol to perform a revolution on its axis,
while, on the other hand, the periodic time of an opaque revolving
body, sufficiently large to produce a similar temporary obscuration
of the sun seen from a fixed star, would be less than fourteen
hours.
It is possible that the decrease of light in some of the variable
stars may arise from large spots on their surface, like those occasionally
seen in the radiant fluid masses on the surface of the
sun. One of these spots which was measured by Sir John Herschel
on the 20th of March, 1836, with its penumbra, occupied an
area of 3780 millions of square miles; and the black central part of
395a spot that appeared on the 25th of May following would have
allowed the globe of the earth to drop through it, leaving a thousand
miles clear of contact all around this tremendous abyss.
All the variable stars on record of which the places are distinctly
indicated have occurred without exception in, or close upon, the
borders of the Milky Way, and that only within the following
semicircle, the preceding having offered no example of the kind.
Many stars have actually disappeared from the heavens.
42 Virginis seems to be of the number, having been missed
by Sir John Herschel on the 9th of May, 1828, and not again
found, though he frequently had occasion to observe that part of
the sky. Mr. Cooper, of the Markree Observatory, has given a list
of fifty stars that are missing since the publication of his list of
stars in 1847. Comparing the present state of the heavens with
more ancient catalogues, a much greater number have disappeared.
Thousands of stars that seem to be only brilliant points of
light, when carefully examined are found to be in reality systems
of two or more suns, many of which are known to revolve about
one another. These binary and multiple systems are very
remote, requiring powerful telescopes to show the stars separately.
They are divided into eight classes, according to the
proximity of the two stars. The first class comprises only such
as are less than 1ʺ of space apart; those of the second class are
more apart than 1ʺ and less than 2ʺ, &c. &c. Sometimes the
two stars are of equal magnitude, but more frequently a conspicuous
star is accompanied by a smaller companion. In some
cases the conspicuous star itself is double, as in ζ Cancri, ξ Scorpio,
11 Monocerotis, and 12 Lyncis, which are triple stars. Each of
the two stars of ε Lyræ is a beautiful and close double star; so
that which in a common telescope appears merely to be a double
star, is found to be quadruple with a very excellent instrument.
The multiple system of θ Orionis is one of the most remarkable
objects in our hemisphere. To the naked eye and with an ordinary
telescope it seems to be a single star, but it really consists of
four brilliant stars forming a trapezium, and accompanied by two
excessively minute and very close companions, to perceive both
of which is the severest test of a telescope.
The first catalogue of double stars in which their places and
relative positions are given was accomplished by the talent and
industry of Sir William Herschel, who made so many great discoveries,
396and with whom the idea of their combination in binary
and multiple systems originated; and that important fact he
established by the discovery of a revolving motion in 50 or 60,
and by the determination of the revolution of one star about the
other of Castor or α Geminorum, the largest and finest double
star in the northern hemisphere. He even assigned the approximate
periodic times of this and of several other binary systems.
More than 100 stars are now known to be stellar systems.
The positions of many hundreds were measured by Sir John
Herschel and Sir James South; and the catalogue of the double
stars in the northern hemisphere, which have been micrometrically
measured, has been increased to more than 6000 by MM. Bessel,
Struve, and British astronomers.
Extensive catalogues of double stars in the southern hemisphere
have been published by the astronomers in our colonial
establishments. To these Sir John Herschel added 1081 during
his residence at the Cape of Good Hope: the angles of position
and distances of the stars from one another he measured,
and found that many of them have very rapid orbital motions.
The elliptical elements of the orbits and periodic times of fifteen
have been determined by the most eminent astronomers with
wonderful accuracy, considering the enormous distances and the
extreme delicacy and difficulty of the subject. M. Savary has
the merit of having first determined the elements of the orbit of
a double star from observation. The difficulty of doing so is
great, because the nearest fixed star is 211,000 times farther
from the sun than the earth is, and the orbit itself is only visible
with the best telescopes; consequently a very small error in
observation occasions an enormous error in the determination
of quantities at that distance.
In observing the relative position of the stars of a binary
system, the distance between them, and also the angle of position,
that is, the angle which the meridian, or a parallel to the
equator, makes with the line joining the two stars, are measured.
The different values of the angle of position show whether the revolving
star moves from east to west, or the contrary; whether
the motion be uniform or variable, and at what points it is greatest
or least. The measures of the distances show whether the
two stars approach or recede from one another. From these the
form and nature of the orbit are determined. Were observations
397perfectly accurate, four values of the angle of position, and of
the corresponding distances at given epochs, would be sufficient
to assign the form and position of the curve described by the
revolving star; this, however, scarcely ever happens. The accuracy
of each result depends upon taking the mean of a great
number of the best observations, and eliminating error by mutual
comparison. The distances between the stars are so minute that
they cannot be measured with the same accuracy as the angles
of position; therefore, in order to determine the orbit of a star
independently of the distance, it is necessary to assume, as the
most probable hypothesis, that the stars are subject to the law of
gravitation, and consequently that one of the two stars revolves
in an ellipse about the other, supposed to be at rest, though not
necessarily in the focus. A curve is thus constructed graphically
by means of the angles of position and the corresponding times of
observation. The angular velocities of the stars are obtained by
drawing tangents to this curve at stated intervals, whence the
apparent distances, or radii vectores of the revolving star, become
known for each angle of position, because, by the laws of elliptical
motion, they are equal to the square roots of the apparent angular
velocities. Now that the angles of position estimated from
a given line, and the corresponding distances of the two stars, are
known, another curve may be drawn, which will represent on
paper the actual orbit of the star projected on the visible surface
of the heavens; so that the elliptical elements of the true orbit,
and its position in space, may be determined by a combined
system of measurements and computation. But, as this orbit has
been obtained on the hypothesis that gravitation prevails in these
distant regions, which could not be known à priori, it must be
compared with as many observations as can be obtained, to ascertain
how far the computed ellipse agrees with the curve actually
described by the star.
γ Virginis consists of two stars of nearly the same magnitude;
they were so far apart in the beginning and middle of last century,
that they were mentioned by Bradley, and marked in Mayer’s
catalogue, as two distinct stars. Since that time they have been
continually approaching each other, till in January, 1836, one
star was seen to eclipse the other, by Admiral Smyth at his Observatory
at Bedford, and by Sir John Herschel at the Cape of
Good Hope. A series of observations since the beginning of the
398present century has enabled Sir John to determine the form and
position of the elliptical orbit of the revolving star with extraordinary
truth by the preceding method. According to his calculation,
it came to its perihelion on the 18th of August of the year
1834. Its previous velocity was so great that the revolving star
described an angle of 68° in one year. By the laws of elliptical
motion its angular velocity must diminish till it arrives at its
aphelion. The accuracy with which the motions of the binary
systems are measured, and the skill employed in the deduction of
the elliptical elements, are now so great, that the periodic time of
γ Virginis, determined by Sir John Herschel and Admiral Smyth
from their respective observatories, combined with those of Sir
William Herschel, only differ by two years, Sir John having
obtained a period of 182 years, Admiral Smyth that of 180. By
the aid of more numerous observations Mr. Fletcher has found
that the true period is 184·53 years, and that the revolving star
passed its perihelion in 1837. It is by such successive steps that
astronomy is brought to perfection (N. 232).
Some of the double stars have very long periods, such as ς
Coronæ, where the revolving star takes 737 years nearly to accomplish
a circuit. Others again have very short periods, as η Coronæ,
ζ Cancri, and ξ Ursæ Majoris, whose periodic times are 42·500,
58·91, and 58·26 years respectively: therefore each of these has
performed more than one entire revolution since their motions
were observed. ζ Herculis, whose periodic time is only about
301⁄4
years, has accomplished two complete circuits, the lesser star
having been eclipsed by the greater each time. The first of these
two truly wonderful events, of one sun eclipsing another sun, was
seen by Sir William Herschel in 1782.
The orbits and periodic times of so many of these binary systems
having been determined proves beyond a doubt that sun revolves
about sun in the starry firmament by the same law of gravitation
that makes the earth and planets revolve about the sun (N. 232).
Since the parallax of 61 Cygni and that of α Centauri have
been determined, Sir John Herschel has made the following approximation
to the dimensions of their orbits and masses. The
distance between the two stars of 61 Cygni, that is the radius
vector of the revolving star, has hardly varied from 15ʺ·5 ever
since the earliest observations; while in that time the star has
moved through 50°; it is evident therefore that the orbit must be
399nearly circular. It is at right angles to the visual ray, and the
periodic time is 514 years. The parallax or radius of the earth’s
orbit as seen from the star is 0ʺ·348, while the radius of the star’s
orbit as seen from the earth is 15ʺ·5; hence the radius of the
star’s orbit is to that of the earth’s orbit as 15ʺ·5 to 0ʺ·348, or
nearly as 45 to 1. So the orbit described by the two stars of
61 Cygni about one another greatly exceeds that which Neptune
describes about the sun. Since the mean distance of the
stars and their periodic time are given, the sum of the masses
of the two stars is computed to be 0·3529, that of the sun being
1. Thus our sun is not vastly greater nor vastly less than the
stars composing 61 Cygni, which is a small inconspicuous star to
the naked eye, not exceeding the 6th magnitude.
Of all the double stars α Centauri is the most beautiful: it is
the brightest star in the southern hemisphere, equal, if not superior,
to Arcturus in lustre. The distance between the two stars
has been decreasing at the rate of half a second annually since
the year 1822, while the angular motion has undergone very little
change, which shows that the plane of the orbit passes through
the earth like the orbits of 44 Boötes, and π Serpentarii; that is to
say, the edge of the orbit in these three stellar systems is presented
to the earth, so that the revolving star seems to move in a
straight line, and to oscillate on each side of its primary. Were
this libration owing to parallax, it would be annual from the
revolution of the earth about the sun; but as years elapse before
it amounts to a sensible quantity, it can only arise from a real
orbital motion seen obliquely. In this case five observations are
sufficient for the determination of the orbit, provided they be
exact; but the quantities to be measured are so minute, that it is
only by a very long series of observations that accuracy can be
attained. In 1834 Captain Jacob determined the periodic time of
the revolving star of α Centauri to be 77 years, and the distance
between the two to be 17ʺ·5; and since the decrease is half a
second annually, the distance or radius vector of the revolving star
was 12ʺ·5 in the year 1822; and as Mr. Henderson had determined
the parallax or radius of the earth’s orbit as seen from the star
to be ·913, it follows that the real semi-axis of the revolving star’s
orbit is
131⁄2
times greater than the semi-axis of the earth’s orbit
as a minimum. The real dimensions of the ellipse therefore
cannot be so small as the orbit of Saturn, and may possibly
400exceed that of Uranus. It is very probable that an occultation of
one of the suns by the other will take place in 1867, or a very
close appulse of the two stars.
Singular anomalies have appeared in the motions of 70 Ophiuchi,
which was discovered to be a binary system by Sir William
Herschel in 1779, and which has since nearly accomplished a revolution.
Various orbits have been computed: those which best
represent the angles of position fail with regard to the distances of
the stars from one another, and vice versâ. But it is a very remarkable
fact that the errors are periodical, being for considerable
periods of time alternately in excess and defect. Captain W. S.
Jacob, who determined the periodic time of the revolving star to
be 93 years, attributes this anomaly to the disturbing action of
an opaque body revolving round the lesser star. Assuming that
to be the case, and computing, he found that the errors were considerably
diminished both in the angle of position and distance.
It is a subject of the highest interest, and well worthy of the
attention of such astronomers as have the means of making the
necessary observations. Among the triple systems, as ζ Cancri,
two of the stars revolve about one another in 58·9 years; but
the motion of the third and most distant is so slow, that it has
only accomplished a tenth part of its revolution about the other
two since the system was discovered.
It appears from the calculations of Mr. Dunlop that ς Eridani
accomplishes a revolution in little more than 30 years. The
motion of Mercury is more rapid than that of any of the planets,
being at the rate of 107,000 miles an hour. The perihelion
velocity of the comet of 1680 was 880,000 miles an hour; but, if
the two stars of ς Eridani, or of ξ Ursæ Majoris, be as remote
from one another as the nearest fixed star is from the sun, the
velocity of the revolving star must exceed the power of imagination
to conceive. The elliptical motion of the double stars shows
that gravitation is not confined to the planetary motions, but that
systems of suns in the far distant regions of the universe are also
obedient to its laws. The stellar systems present a kind of
sidereal chronometer, by which the chronology of the heavens
will be marked out to future ages by epochs of their own, liable
to no fluctuations from such disturbances as take place in our
system. Some stars are apparently double, though altogether
unconnected, one being far behind the other in space, as α Lyræ,
401which apparently consists of two stars, one of the first, the other
of the eleventh magnitude. Aldebaran, α Aquilæ, and Pollux are
remarkable instances of these optically double stars. It has been
shown how favourable that circumstance is for ascertaining the
parallax of the nearest of the two. (N. 232.)
The double stars are of various hues: sometimes both stars
are of the same colour, as in α Centauri and 61 Cygni, where the
larger stars are of a bright orange and the smaller ones a deeper
tint of the same, but they most frequently exhibit the contrasted
colours. The large star is generally yellow, orange, or red; and
the small star blue, purple, or green. Sometimes a white star is
combined with a blue or a purple, and more rarely a red and
white are united. In many cases these appearances are due to
the influence of contrast on our judgment of colours. For
example, in observing a double star, where the large one is a full
ruby red, or almost blood colour, and the small one a fine green,
the latter loses its colour when the former is hid by the cross
wires of the telescope. That is the case with γ Andromedæ,
which is a triple star, the small one, which appears green,
being closely double. ι Cancri is an instance of a large yellow
star and a small one which appears blue by contrast. Still there
are a vast number where the colours are decidedly different, and
suggest the curious idea of two suns, a red and a green, or a
yellow and a blue, so that a planet circulating round one of them
may have the variety of a red day and a green day, a yellow day
and a blue day. Sir John Herschel observes, in one of his papers
in the Philosophical Transactions, as a very remarkable fact,
that, although red stars are common enough, no example of a
solitary blue, green, or purple star has yet been produced.
Sirius is the only star on record whose colour has changed. In
the time of Ptolemy it was red; now it is one of the whitest stars
in the heavens.
M. Struve has found that, out of 596 bright double stars, 375
pairs have the same intensity of light and colour; 101 pairs
have different intensity, but the same colour; and 120 pairs
have the colours of the two stars decidedly different.
Certain rays, which exist in the sun’s light, are wanting in the
spectra of every coloured star, and probably never existed in the
light of these stars, as there is no reason to believe that they
are absorbed by the stars’ atmosphere, though they may be by
402the earth’s. There are no defective rays in the white light of
Sirius, Procyon, and others; but Sir David Brewster found in
the spectrum of the orange-coloured light of ζ Herculis a defective
band in the red space, and two or more in the blue; consequently,
the orange colour of the star is owing to a want of blue rays; for
flames in which certain rays are wanting take the colour of the
predominating rays. If the black rays in the solar spectrum
were owing to the absorption of the sun’s atmosphere, the light
from the margin of his disc, having to pass through a greater
thickness of it, would exhibit deeper lines than that which comes
from his centre; but, as no difference is perceptible, it may be
inferred that the analogous bands in the light of the coloured
stars are not due to the absorption of their atmospheres, but that
they arise from the different kinds of combustion by which these
bodies are lighted up.
All the ordinary methods fail for finding the parallax when the
distances of the stars are very great. An angle even of one or
two seconds, viewed in the focus of our largest telescopes, does
not equal the thickness of a spider’s thread, which makes it
impossible to measure such minute quantities with any degree of
accuracy. In some cases, however, the binary systems of stars
furnish a method of estimating an angle of even the tenth of a
second, which is thirty times more accurate than by any other
means. From them the actual distances of some of the more
remote stars will ultimately be known.
Suppose that one star revolves round another in an orbit which
is so obliquely seen from the earth as to look like an ellipse in a
horizontal position, then it is clear that one-half of the orbit will
be nearer to us than the other half. Now, in consequence of the
time which light takes to travel, we always see the satellite star
in a place which it has already left. Hence, when that star sets
out from the point of its orbit which is nearest to us, its light
will take more and more time to come to us in proportion as the
star moves round to the most distant point in its orbit. On that
account the star will appear to us to take more time in moving
through that half of its orbit than it really does. Exactly the
contrary takes place on the other half; for the light will take
less and less time to arrive at the earth in proportion as the star
approaches nearer to us; and therefore it will seem to move
through this half of its orbit in less time than it really does.
403This circumstance furnishes the means of finding the absolute
breadth of the orbit in miles, and from that the true distance of
the star from the earth. For, since the greatest and least distances
of the satellite star from the earth differ by the breadth of
its orbit, the time which the star takes to move from the nearest
to the remotest point of its orbit is greater than it ought to be by
the whole time its light takes to cross the orbit, and the period
of moving through the other half is exactly as much less. Hence
the difference between the observed times of these two semi-revolutions
of the star is equal to twice the time that its light
employs to cross its orbit; and, as we know the velocity of light,
the diameter of the orbit may be found in miles, and from that
its whole dimensions; for the position of the orbit with regard
to us is known by observation, as well as the place, inclination,
and apparent magnitude of its major axis, or, which is the same
thing, the angle under which it is seen from the earth. Since,
then, three things are known in this great triangle, namely, the
base or major axis of the orbit in miles, the angle opposite to it
at the earth, and the angle it makes with the visual ray, the distance
of the satellite star from the earth may be found by the
most simple of calculations. The merit of having first proposed
this very ingenious method of finding the distance of the stars is
due to M. Savary; but, unfortunately, it is not of general application,
as it depends upon the position of the orbit, and a long
time must elapse before observation can furnish data, since the
shortest period of any revolving star that we know of is 30 years.
Still the distances of a vast number of stars may ultimately be
made out in this way; and, as one important discovery almost
always leads to another, their masses may thus be weighed against
that of the earth or sun.
The only data employed for finding the mass of the earth, as
compared with that of the sun, are, the angular motion of our
globe round the sun in a second of time, and the distance of the
earth from the sun in miles (N. 233). Now, by observations of
the binary systems, we know the angular velocity of the small
star round the great one; and, when we know the distance
between the two stars in miles, it will be easy to compute how
many miles the small star would fall through by the attraction
of the great one in a second of time. A comparison of this space
with the space through which the earth would descend towards
404the sun in a second will give the ratio of the mass of the great
star to that of the sun or earth. According to M. Bessel, the
weight of the two stars of 61 Cygni is equal to half the weight of
the sun. Little as we know of the absolute magnitude of the
fixed stars, the quantity of light emitted by many of them shows
that they must be much larger than the sun. Dr. Wollaston
determined the approximate ratio which the light of a wax candle
bears to that of the sun, moon, and stars, by comparing their
respective images reflected from small glass globes filled with
mercury, whence a comparison was established between the
quantities of light emitted by the celestial bodies themselves. By
this method he found that the light of α Lyræ is five and a half
times greater than that of the sun. Sir John Herschel reflected
the moon’s light totally by a prism, which, concentrated by a
lens, was compared directly with that of α Centauri. After
making allowance for the quantity of the moon’s light lost in
passing through the lens and prism, he found that the mean
quantity of light sent to the earth by a full moon exceeds that
sent by α Centauri in the proportion of 27,408 to 1. Now,
Dr. Wollaston found the proportion of the sun’s light to that of
the full moon to be that of 801,072 to 1. Hence, the light sent
to us by the sun is to that sent by α Centauri as about twenty-two
thousand millions to one. But, as the parallax of α Centauri
is 1ʺ, it really is two and a half times brighter than the sun.
The light of Sirius is four times that of α Centauri, but its
parallax is only 0ʺ·230: hence it has an intrinsic splendour 63·02
times that of our luminary. It is therefore estimated to be a
hundred times as large; so that, were Sirius in the earth’s place,
its surface would extend 150 times as far as the orbit of the
moon. The light of Sirius, according to the observations of
Sir John Herschel, is 324 times greater than that of a star of the
sixth magnitude; if we suppose the two to be really of the same
size, their distances from us must be in the ratio of 57·3 to 1,
because light diminishes as the square of the distance of the
luminous body increases.
So many of the stars have proper motions altogether independent
of the annual rotation of the earth in its orbit, that it may
be doubted whether there be such a thing as a fixed star.
Groombridge is the most rapid known: it has a proper motion of
7ʺ of arc annually; α Centauri moves at the rate of 3ʺ·58 annually,
405and 61 Cygni describes a line in space of 5ʺ·12 in the same
time. These motions are probably in curves, but at the distance
of the earth they will appear to be rectilineal for ages to come.
The motion of little more than five seconds of space, which 61
Cygni describes annually, seems to us to be extremely small;
but at the distance of that star an angle of one second corresponds
to twenty-four millions of millions of miles; consequently the
annual motion of 61 Cygni is 120 millions of millions of miles,
and yet, as M. Arago observes, we call it a fixed star. From the
same cause it is evident that the crowding of the stars in the
Milky Way may be apparent only, and that the stars may be at
vast distances from one another, and no doubt are.
Were the solar system and the whole of the stars visible to
us carried forward in space by a motion common to all, like ships
drifting in a current, it would be impossible for us, moving with
the rest, to ascertain its direction. Sir William Herschel perceived
that a great part of the motions of the stars is only
apparent, arising from a real motion of the sun in a contrary
direction. Among many discrepancies he found that the stars in
the northern hemisphere have a general tendency to move towards
a point diametrically opposite to λ Herculis, which he attributed
to a motion of the solar system in a contrary direction. For it
was evident to him, that the stars, from the effects of perspective
alone, would seem to diverge in the direction to which the solar
system was going, and would converge towards the space it had
left, and that there would be a regularity in these apparent
motions which would hereafter be detected. Since Sir William
Herschel’s time the proper motions of the stars have been determined
with much greater accuracy, and many have been added
to the list by comparing the ancient and modern tables of their
places; his views have been established by four of the greatest
astronomers of the age, MM. Lundahles, Argelander, Otto
Struve, and Peters, who have clearly proved the motion of the
sun from that of the stars in the northern hemisphere, and Mr.
Galloway has come to the same conclusion from the motions of
the stars in the southern hemisphere (N. 234). The result is,
that the sun, accompanied by all his attendant planets, is moving
at the rate of 422,424 miles—or over a space nearly equal to his
own diameter—in the course of a day, and that the motion is
406directed towards a point in a line joining the two stars μ and
π Herculis at a quarter of the apparent distance of these two
stars, reckoning from π Herculis. This investigation was founded
upon no law assumed or observed, such as the circulation of all
the stars of our firmament about a common centre, though
philosophers have speculated as to the probability of such a
motion in the sun and stars in the plane of the Milky Way.
Should the sun and his stellar companions be moving in a nearly
circular orbit, the centre of motion would be in the plane passing
through the sun perpendicular to the direction of his motion.
The constellations through which that great circle would pass
are Pisces, Australis, Pegasus, Andromeda, Perseus, &c. M.
Argelander is of opinion that the sun’s orbit is nearly in the plane
of the Milky Way, and, therefore, that its centre must probably be
in Perseus, while M. Mädler places it in the Pleiades, which seems
to be inadmissible; but the data are too uncertain at present to
admit of any absolute conclusion as to the sun’s orbit and the
general motion of the stellar firmament: for though the stars in
every region of the sky tend towards a point in Hercules, it is not
yet known whether their motions are uniform or variable, whether
the sun’s motion be gradually changing, and whether the stars
form different independent systems, each having its own centre
of attraction, or if all obey one powerful controlling force which
pervades the whole universe. Accurate observations of the places
of a select number of stars of all dimensions in the Milky Way
continued for a series of years would no doubt decide this point.
The proper motion of a star combined with the progressive
velocity of light alters the apparent periodic time of the revolving
star of a binary system. If the orbit of a double star be at right
angles to the visual ray, and both the sun and the star at rest, the
periodic time of the revolving star, say of 10,000 days, would
always be the same. But if the centre of gravity of the star
were to recede in a direct line from the sun with the velocity of
one tenth of the radius of the earth’s orbit in a day, then at the
end of 10,000 days it would be more remote from us by 1000 of
such radii—a space light would take 57 days to traverse:
hence, although the periodic time of the star would really be the
same, the completion of its period would only be known to us 57
days after it had taken place, so that the periodic time would
407appear to us to be 10,057 days instead of 10,000. Were the star
to approach to the sun by the same quantity instead of receding,
the apparent periodic time would be diminished by 57 days.
As the sun is only a unit in the stellar system, so the Milky
Way, and all the stars that adorn the firmament of both hemispheres,
constitute a group which is but a unit among the infinite
numbers of starry clusters and nebulæ that are profusely scattered
throughout the universe.
By the aid of a good telescope there may be seen on the clear
vault of heaven, between the stars of our own stellar system, and
far in the depths of space, an immense multitude of objects like
comets or clouds of white vapour of all forms and sizes. Some
are mixed with stars, others are entirely formed of them. Many
appear as if they were stellar, but required a telescope of higher
power to resolve them, and vast numbers appear to be matter
rarefied in the highest possible degree, giving no indication of a
stellar nature; and these are in every state of condensation, from
a vague film hardly to be discerned to such as have actually
arrived at a solid nucleus of stars. The cloudy appearance is
merely the blending of the rays of innumerable stars which are
themselves invisible from their extreme distance, like parts of the
Milky Way. Sir William Herschel was at first of that opinion,
and the nebulæ that have been resolved by Lord Rosse’s telescope
have led astronomers to believe that such is the case. Yet the
tails of comets, the zodiacal light, and the extensive luminous
atmospheres which encompass many of the stars, show that, in
all probability, a self-luminous phosphorescent material substance
in a highly diluted or gaseous form exists in vast abundance.
The number of the nebulæ, like that of the stars, is only limited
by the imperfection of our instruments, for each improvement in
the telescope only enables us to penetrate a little farther into the
infinity of space—to see a few more of these shadowy existences
in the far distance, and to resolve a few more of those that are
comparatively near. Sir William Herschel examined the nature
and determined the position of 2500 nebulæ in the northern
hemisphere whose places were computed from his observations,
reduced to a common epoch, and arranged into a catalogue, in
order of right ascension, by his sister, Miss Caroline Herschel,
who added lustre to the name she bore by her eminence in astronomical
knowledge and discovery. Sir John Herschel revised
408his father’s observations, and added 800 nebulæ to the catalogue
before he went to the Cape of Good Hope, in order to complete
the survey of the heavens. On his return he published a catalogue
of 2049 nebulæ of the southern hemisphere, of which 500
were previously unknown, with their position in the heavens.
In a work unparalleled for elegance of style, depth of knowledge,
and originality of views, he has given engravings from his drawings
of the most remarkable objects, so that whatever changes
may take place in their form, place, or condensation, will be
known by astronomers of future ages.
Though infinite in variety, the nebulæ are of two distinct
classes; one consists of patches of great dimensions, capriciously
irregular, assuming all the fantastic forms of clouds, now bright,
now obscure; sometimes like vapour flying before the wind;
sometimes stretching long arms into space. Many present an
ill-defined surface, in which it is difficult to say where the centre
of the greatest brightness is. Large portions are resolvable into
stars; many have a granulated appearance, as if they were resolvable;
and others probably are not so merely from the smallness
and closeness of the stars, and possibly from their remoteness,
indicating the complex and irregular form the Milky Way
would present if seen from a distance. A wonderful nebula of
this kind is visible to the naked eye in the constellation of Orion;
it is of vast extent, sending branches even into the southern
hemisphere; and, although Lord Rosse’s telescope has resolved
much that had hitherto resisted others, there are parts that still
maintain their nebulous appearance from extreme remoteness,
presenting a kind of mottled aspect, like flocks or wisps of wool,
or mackerel sky. There can be no doubt of its being an unfathomable
congeries of stars, which there is reason to believe has
changed its form in some parts within the last fifty years. Vast
multitudes of nebulæ of this kind are so faint as to be with difficulty
discerned at all till they have been for some time in the
field of the telescope, or are just about to quit it. Occasionally
they are so vague, that the eye is conscious of something being
present, without being able to define what it is; but the unchangeableness
of its position convinces the mind that it is a real
object—“an image was before mine eyes, but I could not discern
the form thereof.”
No drawing can give an idea of the boundaries of such nebulæ
409as that of Orion; even with Lord Rosse’s telescope the edges either
fade into a luminous mist, which becomes more rare till it is imperceptible,
or end in a tissue of faintish flocculi, or in filaments
which become finer and more scattered till they cease to be
visible, showing that the real boundaries have not been seen.
The other class of nebulæ, vastly inferior in size, of definite
forms and great variety of character, are scattered through the
remote heavens, or congregated in a great nebulous district far
from the Milky Way. Many cling to stars like wisps of clouds,
others are exactly like comets with comæ and tails; but the most
definite forms are annular and lenticular nebulæ, nebulous stars,
planetary and elliptical nebulæ, and starry clusters. However,
there are two in the northern hemisphere differing from all of
these, which are described by Sir John Herschel as amazing
objects. One in Vulpecula is like an hourglass or dumb bell of
bright matter, surrounded by a thin hazy atmosphere so as to
give the whole an oval form, or the appearance of an oblate
spheroid; with a higher optical power its form is much the same,
but the brighter part is resolved into stars, and the hazy part,
though still nebulous, assumes that mottled appearance which
shows that the whole is a stellar system of the most peculiar
structure: it is a phenomenon that bears no resemblance to any
known object. (Fig. 3, plate 8, and fig. 3, plate 9). The other
is indeed most wonderful, and its history shows the gradual
increase in the space-penetrating power of telescopes. To Messier
it appeared merely to be a double nebula with stars; with Sir
William Herschel’s telescope it presented the appearance of a
bright round nebula encompassed at a little distance by a halo
or glory, and accompanied by a companion; while in Sir John
Herschel’s 20 feet reflector it appeared to “consist of a bright
round nucleus, surrounded at a distance by a nebulous ring split
through half its circumference, and having the split portions
separated at an angle of 45 degrees each to the plane of the
other.” (Fig. 1, plate 10.) This nebula appeared to Sir John to
“bear a strong similitude to the Milky Way, suggesting the idea
of a brother system bearing a real physical resemblance and
strong analogy of structure to our own.”
This object, which disclosed to Lord Rosse the astonishing
phenomenon of spiral nebulæ seen in his telescope, presents
the appearance of the fig. 1 in plate 10, in which the partial
410division of the limb of the ring into two branches is at once
recognised in the bright convolutions of the spiral. The outlying
nebula is connected by a narrow curved band of light with
the ring; the whole is either resolved into stars, or evidently
might be with a still higher optical power. With regard to the
marvellous nebula in question Lord Rosse observes, that “with
each increase of optical power the structure has become more
complicated, and more unlike anything that could result from
any form of a dynamical law of which we find a counterpart in
our system. The connection of the companion with this great
nebula, of which there is not the least doubt, adds to the difficulty
of forming any hypothesis. It is impossible that such a system
could exist without internal movement, to which may be added
a resisting medium; but it cannot be regarded as a case of mere
static equilibrium.” This is by no means the only instance of a
spiral nebula; Lord Rosse has discovered several others: some are
easily seen—others require the highest powers of his telescope.
From the numerous offsets that branch from the Milky Way and
run far into space, it may possibly partake also of the spiral form.
There are seven annular nebulæ in the northern hemisphere,
since Lord Rosse has discovered that five of the planetary nebulæ
belong to this class. One of the finest examples of an annular
nebula is to be seen midway between β and γ Lyræ (fig. 2, plate 9).
According to Sir John Herschel, it is elliptical in the ratio of 4 to
5, and is sharply defined—the internal opening occupying about
half the diameter. This opening is not entirely dark, but filled
with a faint hazy light like fine gauze stretched over a hoop. Its
diameter, if it is as far from us as 61 Cygni, must be 1300 times
greater than the diameter of the earth’s orbit—dimensions that
are most astounding. Lord Rosse’s telescope resolves this object
into stars of extreme minuteness, with filaments of stars adhering
to its edges and a pretty bright star in its interior. These rings
are like hollow shells whose borders seem brighter because the
nebulous substance, whatever it may be, is more condensed to
appearance than the central part. The other annular nebula in
the northern hemisphere described by Sir John Herschel is a
small faint object, and more easily resolvable into stars. One of
the annular nebulæ seen by Lord Rosse is surrounded by a faint
external flat ring; another has ansæ, as if an annular nebulous
ring encompassed it and was foreshortened. Two annular nebulæ
411have perforations as if the black sky was seen through openings
in the interior haze, for in no instance is the central opening
quite dark.
Some nebulæ are like very elliptical annular systems seen
obliquely. If they be elliptical flat rings, the dark centre may be
a real opening; but should the systems be a series of very long
elliptical concentric shells surrounding a hollow, the dark axis
may be merely a line of comparative darkness.
The connection of the elliptical nebulæ with double stars is
mentioned as very remarkable. In one elliptical nebula whose
longer axis is 50ʺ there are two individuals of a double star each
of the 10th magnitude symmetrically placed rather nearer the
vertex of the ellipse than the foci; in another the stars are unequal,
but placed exactly at the extremities of the major axis,
as in plate 8: besides these there are several other instances.
Double nebulæ are not unfrequent in both hemispheres, exhibiting
all the varieties of distance, position, and relative brightness,
with their counterparts the double stars. The rarity of
single nebulæ as large, faint, and as little condensed in the centre
as these, makes it extremely improbable that two such bodies
should be accidentally so near as to touch, and often in part to overlap
each other, as these do. It is much more likely that they
constitute systems; and, if so, it will form an interesting object
of future inquiry to discover whether they possess orbital motion.
Nebulous stars are beautiful objects, quite different from all
the preceding. They are round or oval, increasing in density
towards the centre. Sometimes the central matter is so vividly
and sharply condensed and defined that the nebula might be
taken for a bright star surrounded by a thin atmosphere. One
is a star of the 8th magnitude exactly in the centre of a round
bright atmosphere 25ʺ in diameter; the star is quite stellar, and
not a nucleus: it has not the smallest appearance of being resolvable.
Another nebulous star is ι Orionis, which has a broad atmosphere
in which is a dark cavity not symmetrical with the star,
and a small double star with a similar opening on the edge of the
atmosphere. Lord Rosse observes that these openings appear to
be of the same nature with that within the bright stars in the
trapezium of Orion, the stars being at its edge; and he is convinced
that the stars are not only connected with the nebula, but
that they are equidistant with it; hence, if their parallax can be
412found, the distance of this nebula would be determined. The
zodiacal light or lenticular shaped luminous haze surrounding the
sun which may be seen extending beyond the orbits of Mercury
and Venus soon after sunset in the months of April and May, or
before dawn in November and December, seems to place our
luminary in the class of nebulous stars. The extensive and
delicate atmosphere of these nebulous stars assumes all degrees of
ellipticity, from the circular to the spindle-shaped ray, or almost
the right line.
Planetary nebulæ have exactly the appearance of planets with
round or oval discs, sometimes sharply terminated, at other times
hazy and ill-defined. Their surface, which is blue or blueish
white, is equable or slightly mottled, and their light occasionally
rivals that of the planets in vividness. They are generally
attended by minute stars, which give the idea of accompanying
satellites. These nebulæ are of enormous dimensions. One near
γ Aquarii has a sensible diameter of about twenty seconds, and
another presents a diameter of twelve. Sir John Herschel has
computed that, if these objects be as far from us as the stars,
their real magnitude, on the lowest estimation, must be such as
would fill the orbit of Uranus. He concludes that, if they be
solid bodies of a solar nature, their intrinsic splendour must be far
inferior to that of the sun, because a circular portion of the sun’s
disc subtending an angle of twenty seconds would give a light
equal to that of a hundred full moons; while, on the contrary,
the objects in question are hardly, if at all, visible to the naked
eye. From the uniformity of the discs of these planetary nebulæ,
and their apparent want of condensation, he presumes that they
may be hollow shells emitting light from their surface only.
The southern hemisphere is very rich in them, where twenty-eight
or twenty-nine have been discovered, some in the midst of
a cluster of stars, with which they form a beautiful contrast.
Three are of a decided blue colour, one Prussian blue, or verditer
green, the other two of a bright sky blue, of great beauty and
delicacy. One seems to belong to the class of double nebulæ or
double stellar nebulæ of the utmost remoteness. Since Lord
Rosse’s telescope has shown that five of the planetary nebulæ are
annular, some of those in the southern hemisphere may ultimately
be found to belong to the same class.
Probably nine tenths at least of the nebulous contents of the
413heavens consist of spherical or elliptical forms presenting every
variety of elongation and central condensation. Of these a great
number have been resolved into stars, and a great many present
that mottled appearance which renders it certain that an increase
of optical power would decompose them. Those which resist do
so on account of the smallness and closeness of the stars of which
they consist.
Elliptical nebulæ are very common; by much the finest may
be seen near the star υ in the girdle of Andromeda. It is visible
to the naked eye, and has frequently been taken for a comet.
With a low optical power it has the spindle-shaped form of fig. 6,
plate 5, the brightness being at first gradually and then rapidly
condensed towards the centre, so that it has been compared to a
star shining through horn, but had never appeared resolvable even
with high optical powers till Mr. Bond examined it at the observatory
of Cambridge in the United States. He found that its
brightness extends over
21⁄2
degrees in length, and more than a
degree in breadth, including two small adjacent nebulæ, so that it
is oval. It is strongly and rapidly condensed into a nucleus on
its northern side; and although it was not all resolved, it was
seen to be strewed over with star dust, or extremely minute visible
stars, which leaves not a doubt of its being a starry system. The
most remarkable part of Mr. Bond’s discovery are two very
narrow dark lines which extend along one side of the oval parallel
to its major axis. These black streaks, difficult to distinguish,
indicate a stratified structure, and are not the only instance of
that arrangement in nebulæ. Fig. 1, in plate 9, is from Mr.
Bond’s drawing of this nebula.
Multitudes of nebulæ appear to the unassisted eye, or are seen
with ordinary telescopes, like round comets without tails; but
when viewed with powerful instruments they convey the idea of
a globular space, insulated in the heavens and full of stars, constituting
a family or society apart from the rest, subject only to
its own internal laws. To attempt to count the stars in one of
these globular clusters, Sir John Herschel says, would be a vain
task; they are not to be reckoned by hundreds. On a rough
computation, it appears that many clusters of this description
must contain ten or twenty thousand stars compacted and wedged
together in a round space, whose apparent area is not more than
a tenth part of that covered by the moon; so that its centre,
414where the stars are seen projected on each other, is one blaze of
light. If each of these stars be a sun, and if they be separated by
intervals equal to that which separates our sun from the nearest
fixed star, the distance which renders the whole cluster barely
visible to the naked eye must be so great, that the existence of
such a splendid assemblage can only be known to us by light
which must have left it at least a thousand years ago. These
magnificent globular or spheroidal aggregates of stars are so
arranged that the interior strata are more crowded and become
more nearly spherical as they approach the centre. A most
splendid object of this nature may be seen in the constellation
Hercules (N. 235).
Of 131 of these magnificent objects in the southern hemisphere,
two of them are pre-eminently splendid. The globular cluster of
α Centauri is beyond comparison the finest of its kind: it is perfectly
spherical, and occupies a quarter of a square degree; the
stars in it are literally innumerable, crowding and densely aggregated
towards the centre; and, as its light is not more to the
naked eye than that of a star of the 4th or 5th magnitude, their
minuteness is extreme. It has a dark hole in its centre, with a
bridge of stars across,—a circumstance peculiar to this cluster.
Lacaille’s globular cluster, or 47 Toucani, is completely insulated
in a very dark part of the sky not far from the lesser of the
Magellanic clouds. The stars, which are of the 14th magnitude,
immensely numerous, compressed and white, form three distinct
stages round a centre, where they suddenly change in hue, and
form a blaze of rose-coloured light. One cluster consists of large
ruddy stars and small white ones; another of greater beauty consists
of shells or coats of stars of the 11th and 15th magnitude.
There are thirty globular clusters of extreme beauty collected
within a circular space of not more than eighteen degrees radius,
which lies in the part of the sky occupied by the constellations
Corona Australis, the body and head of Sagittarius, the tail of
Scorpio, part of Telescopium and Ara. The Milky Way passes
diametrically across the circular area in question, which gives
prodigious brilliancy to this part of the sky. For besides these
globular clusters, which all lie in the starry part, and not in the
dark spaces, there are the only two annular nebulæ known to
exist in the southern hemisphere. No part of the heavens is
fuller of objects beautiful and remarkable in themselves, and rendered
415still more so by their mode of association, and by the peculiar
features assumed by the Milky Way, which are without a parallel
for richness and magnificence in any other part of the sky. Some
of the globular clusters are so remote that the stars are scarcely
discernible—mere star dust. There is a double globular cluster
in the southern hemisphere of very small dimensions, separated
by a minute interval,—a combination which suggests the idea of
a globular cluster revolving about a very oblate spheroidal one in
the plane of the equator, and in an orbit which is circular, and
seen obliquely like the central nebula itself, with a diameter
somewhat more than four times the latter,—a stupendous system
doubtless, but of which the reality can hardly be supposed
improbable.
There appears to be some connexion between ellipticity of form
and difficulty of resolution, for spherical clusters are in general
easily resolved into their component stars, while there is scarcely
an instance of an elliptical cluster yielding except to a very high
optical power. Vast masses of the nebulæ have never been resolved.
Lord Rosse’s great telescope has resolved parts of the
nebula of Orion, and various others which had not yielded to instruments
of less power; it enables the astronomer to penetrate
farther into space, and shows objects with greater clearness, than
any other. But, excellent as this instrument is, thousands of
nebulæ are not to be resolved even by it. Those who imagine that
any work of man can resolve all the nebulous matter in the
heavens must have a very limited idea of the extent and sublimity
of creation.
Innumerable nebulæ in both hemispheres take the form of
clusters of stars, but are totally different from the globular clusters,
inasmuch as they are of irregular form and follow no uniform
law of condensation. The Pleiades is an instance in our own
stellar system; for although only 7 or 8 stars are visible to the
naked eye, telescopes show that more than 200 belong to the
group. In the constellation Cancer there is a luminous spot called
the Præsepe or Beehive, which a very low power resolves into
stars; and the constellation Coma Berenices is another stellar
group. Many are of exquisite beauty, as that round α Crucis,
which, though consisting of only a hundred and ten stars, is like
a piece of fancy jewellery, from the colours of the stars, which are
greenish white, green, blueish green, and red. Many of these
416clusters contain thousands of stars, and are frequently in the
poorer parts of the sky, as if in the course of ages the stars had
been attracted towards a centre.
The existence of every degree of ellipticity in the nebulæ—from
long lenticular rays to the exact circular form—and of every
shade of central condensation, from the slightest increase of
density to apparently a solid nucleus—may be accounted for
by supposing the general constitutions of those nebulæ to be
that of oblate spheroidal masses of every degree of flatness from
the sphere to the disc, and of every variety in their density and
ellipticity towards the centre. It would be erroneous, however,
to imagine that the forms of these systems are maintained by
forces identical with those already described, which determine the
form of a fluid mass in rotation; because, if the nebulæ be only
clusters of separate stars, as in the greater number of cases there
is every reason to believe them to be, no pressure can be propagated
through them. Consequently, since no general rotation of
such a system as one mass can be supposed, it may be conceived
to be a quiescent form, comprising within its limits an indefinite
number of stars, each of which may be moving in an orbit about
the common centre of the whole, in virtue of a law of internal
gravitation resulting from the compound gravitation of all its
parts. Sir John Herschel has proved that the existence of such
a system is not inconsistent with the law of gravitation under
certain conditions.
The distribution of the nebulæ over the heavens is even more
irregular than that of the stars. In some places they are so
crowded together as scarcely to allow one to pass through the field
of the telescope before another appears, while in other parts hours
elapse without a single nebula occurring. They are in general
only to be seen with the best telescopes, and are most abundant
in a zone whose general direction is not far from the hour circles
0h and 12h, and which crosses the Milky Way nearly at right
angles. Where that nebulous zone passes over the constellations
Virgo, Coma Berenices, and the Great Bear, they are to be found
in multitudes.
The nebulous system is nearly divided into two parts by the
Milky Way. One-third of the whole visible nebulous contents of
the heavens forms a broad irregular mass, interspersed with
vacant intervals, which fills about an eighth of the surface of the
417northern hemisphere. It occupies the constellations Leo, Leo
Minor, the body, tail, and hind legs of Ursa Major, the nose of
Camelopard, the point of the tail of Draco, Canis Venatica, Coma
Berenices, the preceding leg of Boötes, and the head, wings, and
shoulder of Virgo, which is the richest part. There is a lesser
nebulous region in this hemisphere, but entirely separated from
the preceding, which occupies the chest and wing of Pegasus, the
constellations Pisces and Andromeda. If we could imagine the
ring or zone of the Milky Way to encircle or coincide with the
horizon, the great nebulous mass would form a canopy over head,
descending down to a considerable distance on all sides, chiefly
towards the north pole; and the richest part, which is in Virgo,
would then be directly over head in the north pole of the Milky
Way, that is in 12h 47m right ascension, and 64° north polar
distance.
With the exception of the Magellanic clouds, there is a much
greater uniformity in the distribution of the nebulæ in the southern
hemisphere than in the northern. They are separated by
spaces of vacuity of greater or less dimensions. One of these
barren regions extends for nearly fifteen degrees all around the
south pole, and close on its border; the lesser of the Magellanic
clouds occurs completely insulated; while the greater Magellanic
cloud is in connexion with something approaching to a zone of
connected nebulous patches which extends along the back of
Doradus, through a portion of Horologium and Eridanus, part of
Fornix, and over the paws of Cetus to the equator, where it
unites with the nebulous regions of Pisces.
The Magellanic clouds form two of the most striking features
in the southern hemisphere; both of these nebulæ are visible to
the unassisted eye, being nearly of the same intensity as the
brighter portions of the Milky Way; but the smaller is entirely
effaced by moonlight, and the larger nearly so. They are altogether
unconnected with the Milky Way and with one another.
The Nubecula Major is far superior to the Nubecula Minor in
every respect, though they are similar in internal structure.
The former consists of large tracts and ill-defined patches of irresolvable
nebulæ, and nebulosity in every stage of resolution, up
to perfectly resolved stars like the Milky Way; and also of regular
and irregular nebulæ, properly so called; of globular clusters
in every stage of resolvability; and of clustering groups sufficiently
418insulated and condensed to come under the designation of
clusters of stars. Of these the nebula known as Lacaille’s 30
Doradus is too remarkable to be passed over. It is very large,
situate within the Nubecula Major, and consists of an assemblage
of nearly circular loops uniting in a centre, in or near which
there is a circular black hole. In short, for the number and
variety of the objects, there is nothing like this cloud. Within
an area of only forty-two square degrees, Sir John Herschel has
determined the places, and registered 278 nebulæ and clusters of
stars, with fifty or sixty in outlying members immediately adjacent.
Even the most crowded parts of the stratum of Virgo, in
the wing of that constellation, or in Coma Berenices, offer nothing
approaching to it. It is evident, from the intermixture of stars
and unresolved nebulosity, which probably might be resolved
with a higher optical power, that the nubeculæ are to be regarded
as systems sui generis, to which there is nothing analogous in
our hemisphere.
Next to the Magellanic clouds the great nebula round η Argûs
is one of the most wonderful objects of the southern sky. It is
situate in that part of the Milky Way which lies between the
Centaur and the body of Argus, in the midst of one of those rich
and brilliant masses, a succession of which is so curiously contrasted
with the profoundly dark adjacent spaces, and surrounded
by one of the most beautiful parts of the southern heavens. Sir
John Herschel says: “It would be impossible, by verbal description,
to give any just idea of the capricious forms and irregular
gradations of light affected by the different branches and appendages
of this nebula. Nor is it easy for language to convey a full
impression of the beauty and sublimity of the spectacle it offers
when viewed in a sweep, ushered in as it is by so glorious and
innumerable a procession of stars, to which it forms a sort of
climax, justifying expressions which, though I find them written
in my journal in the excitement of the moment, would be
thought extravagant if transferred to these pages. In fact, it is
impossible for any one, with the least spark of astronomical enthusiasm
about him, to pass soberly in review with a powerful
telescope, and on a fine night, that portion of the southern sky
which is comprised between the 6th and 13th degrees of right
ascension, and from 146° to 149° of north polar distance; such
are the variety and interest of the objects he will encounter, and
419such the dazzling richness of the starry ground on which they
are represented to his gaze.” In that portion of the sky there
are many fine double stars—rich starry clusters; the elegant
cluster of variously coloured stars round κ Crucis; a large
planetary nebula with a satellite star; another of a bright blue
colour, exquisitely beautiful and unique; and, lastly, η Argûs
itself, the most extraordinary instance of a variable star in astronomical
history.
It frequently occurred, during Sir John Herschel’s survey of
the southern heavens, that some parts of the sky were noted for
deeper blackness than others, and no stars could be seen; it
frequently happened that far from the Milky Way, or any large
nebula or cluster of stars, there were some indications of very
remote branches of the Milky Way, or of an independent sidereal
system or systems, bearing a resemblance to such branches.
These were indicated by an exceedingly delicate and uniform
dotting or stippling of the sky by points of light too small to
admit of any one of them being steadily and fixedly viewed, and
too numerous to be counted even if possible to view them. The
truth of this existence was felt at the moment of observation;
but the conviction, though often renewed, was not permanent.
The places where these appearances occurred are given, in order
that those who wish to verify them may have it in their power.
Such is a brief account of a very few of the discoveries contained
in Sir John Herschel’s great work on the Nebulæ and
other Phenomena of the Southern Hemisphere,—a work which
will rise in estimation with the lapse of years. No doubt the
form and internal structure of many of these nebulæ will be
changed by telescopes of higher power; but as the places of the
leading phenomena have been determined, the date of that great
work may be regarded as the epoch of nebular time whence the
relative changes that take place in the most distant regions of the
universe will be estimated for ages to come; and in the inimitable
writings of the highly gifted father and son the reader will
find these subjects treated of in a style worthy of it and of them.
Of late years the excellence of the instruments, and still more of
the astronomers, in the foreign observatories, have aided the progress
of sidereal astronomy immensely. Nor has it been cultivated
with less success in our home and colonial establishments:
certainly one of the most remarkable features of the times is the
420number of private observatories, built and furnished with the
best instruments by private gentlemen, whose zeal has been
rewarded by eminent success in all departments of the science.
(N. 236.)
So numerous are the objects which meet our view in the
heavens, that we cannot imagine a point of space where some
light would not strike the eye;—innumerable stars, thousands of
double and multiple systems, clusters in one blaze with their
tens of thousands of stars, and the nebulæ amazing us by the
strangeness of their forms and the incomprehensibility of their
nature, till at last, from the limit of our senses, even these thin
and airy phantoms vanish in the distance. If such remote bodies
shone by reflected light, we should be unconscious of their existence.
Each star must then be a sun, and may be presumed
to have its system of planets, satellites, and comets, like our
own; and, for aught we know, myriads of bodies may be wandering
in space unseen by us, of whose nature we can form no idea,
and still less of the part they perform in the economy of the universe.
Even in our own system, or at its farthest limits, minute
bodies may be revolving like the telescopic planets, which are
so small that their masses have hitherto been inappreciable, and
there may be many still smaller. Nor is this an unwarranted
presumption; many such do come within the sphere of the earth’s
attraction, are ignited by the velocity with which they pass
through the atmosphere, but leave no residuum. These, which
are known as falling stars and meteors, are periodical; but that is
by no means the case with aërolites, which are also ignited by the
sudden condensation of the air on entering our atmosphere, and
are precipitated in solid masses with such violence on the earth’s
surface that they are often deeply buried in the ground.
The fall of meteoric stones is much more frequent than is generally
believed. Hardly a year passes without some instances
occurring; and, if it be considered that only a small part of the
earth is inhabited, it may be presumed that numbers fall in the
ocean, or on the uninhabited part of the land, unseen by man.
They are sometimes of great magnitude; the volume of several
has exceeded that of the planet Ceres, which is about 70 miles in
diameter. One which passed within 25 miles of us was estimated to
weigh about 600,000 tons, and to move with a velocity of about
20 miles in a second; a fragment of it alone reached the earth.
421The obliquity of the descent of meteorites, the peculiar substances
they are composed of, and the explosion accompanying their fall,
show that they are foreign to our system; but whence derived is
still a mystery.
Shooting stars and meteors burst from the clear azure sky, and,
darting along the heavens, are extinguished without leaving any
residuum except a vapour-like smoke, and generally without
noise. Their parallax shows them to be very high in the atmosphere,
sometimes even beyond its supposed limit, and the direction
of their motion is for the most part diametrically opposite to
the motion of the earth in its orbit. The astonishing multitudes
of shooting stars and fire-balls that have appeared at stated
periods over different parts of the globe, warrant the conclusion
that there is either a nebula or that there are myriads of bodies
revolving in groups round the sun which only become visible
when inflamed by entering our atmosphere.
One of these nebulæ or groups seems to meet the earth in its
annual revolution on the 12th and 13th of November.
On the morning of the 12th of November, 1799, thousands of
shooting stars, mixed with large meteors, illuminated the heavens
for many hours over the whole continent of America, from Brazil
to Labrador: it extended to Greenland, and even Germany.
Meteoric showers were seen off the coast of Spain, and in the
Ohio country, on the morning of the 13th of November, 1831;
and during many hours on the morning of the 13th November,
1832, prodigious multitudes of shooting stars and meteors fell at
Mocha on the Red Sea, in the Atlantic, in Switzerland, and at
many places in England. But by much the most splendid
meteoric shower on record began at nine o’clock in the evening
of the 12th of November, 1833, and lasted till sunrise next
morning. It extended from Niagara and the northern lakes of
America to the south of Jamaica, and from 61° of longitude in
the Atlantic to 100° of longitude in central Mexico. Shooting
stars and meteors, of the apparent size of Jupiter, Venus, and
even the full moon, darted in myriads towards the horizon, as if
every star in the heavens had started from their spheres. They
are described as having been frequent as flakes of snow in a snow-storm,
and to have been seen with equal brilliancy over the
greater part of the continent of North America.
Those who witnessed this grand spectacle were surprised to
422see that every one of the luminous bodies, without exception,
moved in lines which converged in one point in the heavens:
none of them started from that point; but their paths, when
traced backwards, met in it like rays in a focus, and the manner
of their fall showed that they descended from it in nearly parallel
straight lines towards the earth.
By far the most extraordinary part of the whole phenomenon
is, that this radiant point was observed to remain stationary near
the star γ Leonis for more than two hours and a half, which
proved the source of the meteoric shower to be altogether independent
of the earth’s rotation, and its parallax showed it to be
far above the atmosphere.
As a body could not be actually at rest in that position, the
group or nebula must either have been moving round the earth
or the sun. Had it been moving about the earth, the course of
the meteors would have been tangential to its surface; whereas
they fell almost perpendicularly, so that the earth in its annual
revolution must have met with the group. The bodies or the
parts of the nebula that were nearest must have been attracted
towards the earth by its gravity, and, as they were estimated to
move at the rate of fourteen miles in a second, they must have
taken fire on entering our atmosphere, and been consumed in
their passage through it.
As all the circumstances of the phenomena were similar on the
same day and during the same hours in 1832, and as extraordinary
flights of shooting stars were seen at many places both
in Europe and America on the 13th of November, 1834, 1835,
and 1836, tending also from a fixed point in the constellation
Leo, it has been conjectured, with much apparent probability,
that this nebula or group of bodies performs its revolution round
the sun in a period of about 182 days, in an elliptical orbit, whose
major axis is 119 millions of miles; and that its aphelion distance,
where it comes in contact with the earth’s atmosphere, is
about 95 millions of miles, or nearly the same with the mean
distance of the earth from the sun. This body must have met
with disturbances after 1799, which prevented it from encountering
the earth for 32 years, and it may again deviate from its path
from the same cause.
It is now well ascertained that great showers of shooting stars
occur also on the 12th of August, whose point of divergence is
423β Camelopardali, so that the earth’s atmosphere comes into contact
with a zone of these small bodies twice in the year. By a
systematic series of observations, MM. Benzenberg and Brand
have clearly made out that the heights at which the falling stars
appear and vanish vary from 16 miles to 140, and their velocities
from 18 to 36 miles in a second, velocities so great as certainly to
indicate a planetary revolution round the sun. As shooting stars
are seen almost every night when the sky is clear, Sir John
Lubbock has thought it probable that some of these bodies may
have come so near, that the attraction of the earth has overcome
that of the sun, and caused them to revolve as satellites round it.
Should that be the case, they might shine by the reflected light
of the sun, and suddenly cease to be visible on entering the
earth’s shadow. The splitting of the falling stars like a rocket,
and the trains of light, may be accounted for by supposing the
stars to graze the surface of the shadow before being eclipsed;
and the disappearance would be more or less rapid according to
the breadth of the penumbra traversed. The calculations of M.
Petit, Director of the Observatory of Toulouse, not only render
probable the existence of small satellites, but tend to establish
the identity of a body revolving round the earth in three hours
and twenty minutes, at a distance of 5000 miles above its surface.
It is evident that in this case the same satellite would be seen
very often, and a very few would be sufficient to account for their
nightly appearance. It is possible, however, that some shooting
stars may belong to one class, and some to the other, since one
group may be revolving about the sun, and another round the
earth. In the case of a satellite shooting star, geometry furnishes
the means of ascertaining its exact distance from the spectator, or
from the centre of the earth, if the time and place of its disappearance
be known with regard to the neighbouring stars. Since
the falling stars are consumed in the atmosphere, their masses
must be small, but it is possible that occasionally one may be
large enough to arrive at the surface of the earth as an aërolite.</div></body></text></TEI>