<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="3">
8
SECTION II.

Elliptical Motion—Mean and True Motion—Equinoctial—Ecliptic—Equinoxes—Mean
and True Longitude—Equation of Centre—Inclination
of the Orbits of Planets—Celestial Latitude—Nodes—Elements
of an Orbit—Undisturbed or Elliptical Orbits—Great Inclination
of the Orbits of the New Planets—Universal Gravitation the
Cause of Perturbations in the Motions of the Heavenly Bodies—Problem
of the Three Bodies—Stability of Solar System depends upon the Primitive
Momentum of the Bodies.
A planet moves in its elliptical orbit with a velocity varying
every instant, in consequence of two forces, one tending to the
centre of the sun, and the other in the direction of a tangent
(N. 38) to its orbit, arising from the primitive impulse given at
the time when it was launched into space. Should the force in the
tangent cease, the planet would fall to the sun by its gravity.
Were the sun not to attract it, the planet would fly off in the
tangent. Thus, when the planet is at the point of its orbit
farthest from the sun, his action overcomes the planet’s velocity,
and brings it towards him with such an accelerated motion, that
at last it overcomes the sun’s attraction, and, shooting past him,
gradually decreases in velocity until it arrives at the most distant
point, where the sun’s attraction again prevails (N. 39). In this
motion the radii vectores (N. 40), or imaginary lines joining the
centres of the sun and the planets, pass over equal areas or spaces
in equal times (N. 41).
The mean distance of a planet from the sun is equal to half
the major axis (N. 42) of its orbit: if, therefore, the planet described
a circle (N. 43) round the sun at its mean distance, the
motion would be uniform, and the periodic time unaltered, because
the planet would arrive at the extremities of the major
axis at the same instant, and would have the same velocity,
whether it moved in the circular or elliptical orbit, since the
curves coincide in these points. But in every other part the
elliptical, or true motion (N. 44), would either be faster or
9slower than the circular or mean motion (N. 45). As it is necessary
to have some fixed point in the heavens from whence to
estimate these motions, the vernal equinox (N. 46) at a given
epoch has been chosen. The equinoctial, which is a great circle
traced in the starry heavens by the imaginary extension of the
plane of the terrestrial equator, is intersected by the ecliptic, or
apparent path of the sun, in two points diametrically opposite to
one another, called the vernal and autumnal equinoxes. The
vernal equinox is the point through which the sun passes in
going from the southern to the northern hemisphere; and the
autumnal, that in which he crosses from the northern to the
southern. The mean or circular motion of a body, estimated
from the vernal equinox, is its mean longitude; and its elliptical,
or true motion, reckoned from that point, is its true longitude
(N. 47): both being estimated from west to east, the direction
in which the bodies move. The difference between the two is
called the equation of the centre (N. 48); which consequently
vanishes at the apsides (N. 49), or extremities of the major axis,
and is at its maximum ninety degrees (N. 50) distant from these
points, or in quadratures (N. 51), where it measures the excentricity
(N. 52) of the orbit; so that the place of the planet in
its elliptical orbit is obtained by adding or subtracting the equation
of the centre to or from its mean longitude.
The orbits of the principal planets have a very small obliquity
or inclination (N. 53) to the plane of the ecliptic in which the
earth moves; and, on that account, astronomers refer their motions
to this plane at a given epoch as a known and fixed position.
The angular distance of a planet from the plane of the ecliptic is
its latitude (N. 54), which is south or north according as the
planet is south or north of that plane. When the planet is in
the plane of the ecliptic, its latitude is zero; it is then said to be
in its nodes (N. 55). The ascending node is that point in the
ecliptic through which the planet passes in going from the
southern to the northern hemisphere. The descending node is
a corresponding point in the plane of the ecliptic diametrically
opposite to the other, through which the planet descends in going
from the northern to the southern hemisphere. The longitude
and latitude of a planet cannot be obtained by direct observation,
but are deduced from observations made at the surface of the
10earth by a very simple computation. These two quantities,
however, will not give the place of a planet in space. Its distance
from the sun (N. 56) must also be known; and, for the
complete determination of its elliptical motion, the nature and
position of its orbit must be ascertained by observation. This
depends upon seven quantities, called the elements of the orbit
(N. 57). These are, the length of the major axis, and the excentricity,
which determine the form of the orbit; the longitude
of the planet when at its least distance from the sun, called the
longitude of the perihelion; the inclination of the orbit to the
plane of the ecliptic, and the longitude of its ascending node:
these give the position of the orbit in space; but the periodic
time, and the longitude of the planet at a given instant, called
the longitude of the epoch, are necessary for finding the place of
the body in its orbit at all times. A perfect knowledge of these
seven elements is requisite for ascertaining all the circumstances
of undisturbed elliptical motion. By such means it is found
that the paths of the planets, when their mutual disturbances are
omitted, are ellipses nearly approaching to circles, whose planes,
slightly inclined to the ecliptic, cut it in straight lines, passing
through the centre of the sun (N. 58). The orbits of the
recently-discovered planets deviate more from the ecliptic than
those of the ancient planets: that of Pallas, for instance, has an
inclination of 34° 42ʹ 29·8ʺ to it; on which account it is more
difficult to determine their motions.
Were the planets attracted by the sun only, they would always
move in ellipses, invariable in form and position; and because
his action is proportional to his mass, which is much larger than
that of all the planets put together, the elliptical is the nearest
approximation to their true motions. The true motions of the
planets are extremely complicated, in consequence of their mutual
attraction, so that they do not move in any known or symmetrical
curve, but in paths now approaching to, now receding from,
the elliptical form; and their radii vectores do not describe areas
or spaces exactly proportional to the time, so that the areas become
a test of disturbing forces.
To determine the motion of each body, when disturbed by all
the rest, is beyond the power of analysis. It is therefore necessary
to estimate the disturbing action of one planet at a time,
11whence the celebrated problem of the three bodies, originally
applied to the moon, the earth, and the sun—namely, the masses
being given of three bodies projected from three given points,
with velocities given both in quantity and direction; and supposing
the bodies to gravitate to one another with forces that are
directly as their masses, and inversely as the squares of the distances,
to find the lines described by these bodies, and their
positions at any given instant; or, in other words, to determine
the path of a celestial body when attracted by a second body,
and disturbed in its motion round the second body by a third—a
problem equally applicable to planets, satellites, and comets.
By this problem the motions of translation of the celestial
bodies are determined. It is an extremely difficult one, and
would be infinitely more so if the disturbing action were not very
small when compared with the central force; that is, if the
action of the planets on one another were not very small when
compared with that of the sun. As the disturbing influence of
each body may be found separately, it is assumed that the action
of the whole system, in disturbing any one planet, is equal to
the sum of all the particular disturbances it experiences, on the
general mechanical principle, that the sum of any number of
small oscillations is nearly equal to their simultaneous and joint
effect.
On account of the reciprocal action of matter, the stability of
the system depends upon the intensity of the primitive momentum
(N. 59) of the planets, and the ratio of their masses to
that of the sun; for the nature of the conic sections in which the
celestial bodies move depends upon the velocity with which they
were first propelled in space. Had that velocity been such as to
make the planets move in orbits of unstable equilibrium (N. 60),
their mutual attractions might have changed them into parabolas,
or even hyperbolas (N. 22); so that the earth and planets might,
ages ago, have been sweeping far from our sun through the
abyss of space. But as the orbits differ very little from circles,
the momentum of the planets, when projected, must have been
exactly sufficient to ensure the permanency and stability of the
system. Besides, the mass of the sun is vastly greater than that of
any planet; and as their inequalities bear the same ratio to their
elliptical motions that their masses do to that of the sun, their
12mutual disturbances only increase or diminish the excentricities
of their orbits by very minute quantities; consequently the
magnitude of the sun’s mass is the principal cause of the stability
of the system. There is not in the physical world a more
splendid example of the adaptation of means to the accomplishment
of an end than is exhibited in the nice adjustment of these
forces, at once the cause of the variety and of the order of
Nature.</div></body></text></TEI>