<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="38">
424
SECTION XXXVII.

Diffusion of Matter through Space—Gravitation—Its Velocity—Simplicity
of its Laws—Gravitation independent of the Magnitude and
Distances of the Bodies—Not impeded by the intervention of any
Substance—Its Intensity invariable—General Laws—Recapitulation
and Conclusion.
The known quantity of matter bears a very small proportion to
the immensity of space. Large as the bodies are, the distances
which separate them are immeasurably greater; but, as design
is manifest in every part of creation, it is probable that, if the
various systems in the universe had been nearer to one another,
their mutual disturbances would have been inconsistent with the
harmony and stability of the whole. It is clear that space is not
pervaded by atmospheric air of such density as that we breathe,
since its resistance would long ere this have arrested the motion
of the planets: it certainly is not a void, but replete with a medium
possibly in itself electric or magnetic, but at all events capable of
transmitting light, heat, magnetism, gravity, and probably influences
of which we can form no idea.
Whatever the laws may be that obtain in the more distant
regions of creation, we are assured that one alone regulates the
motions, not only of our own system, but also of the binary
systems of the fixed stars; and, as general laws form the ultimate
object of philosophical research, we cannot conclude these remarks
without considering the nature of gravitation—that extraordinary
power whose effects we have been endeavouring to trace through
some of their mazes. It was at one time imagined that the
acceleration in the moon’s mean motion was occasioned by the
successive transmission of the gravitating force. It has been
proved that, in order to produce this effect, its velocity must be
about fifty millions of times greater than that of light, which
flies at the rate of 192,000 miles in a second. Its action, even
at the distance of the sun, may therefore be regarded as instantaneous;
yet, remote as the fixed stars are, the solar gravitation
425must have some influence on the nearest of them, as, for example,
α Centauri, which is only 20,602 times the radius of the earth’s
orbit from the sun, while La Place has computed that the solar
gravitation extends a hundred millions of times farther than the
semidiameter of the terrestrial orbit. Possibly the star dust in
the Milky Way may be beyond, or on the verge of, that enormous
limit; yet it is very unlikely that either the sun, or any of the stars
which form the great cluster to which we belong, should be
unconnected bodies.
The curves in which the celestial bodies move by the force of
gravitation are only lines of the second order. The attraction of
spheroids, according to any other law of force than that of gravitation,
would be much more complicated; and, as it is easy to
prove that matter might have been moved according to an infinite
variety of laws, it may be concluded that gravitation must have
been selected by Divine Wisdom out of an infinity of others, as
being the most simple, and that which gives the greatest stability
to the celestial motions.
It is a singular result of the simplicity of the laws of nature,
which admit only of the observation and comparison of ratios,
that the gravitation and theory of the motions of the celestial
bodies are independent of their absolute magnitudes and distances.
Consequently, if all the bodies of the solar system, their mutual
distances, and their velocities, were to diminish proportionally,
they would describe curves in all respects similar to those in
which they now move; and the system might be successively
reduced to the smallest sensible dimensions, and still exhibit the
same appearances.
The action of the gravitating force is not impeded by the intervention
even of the densest substances. If the attraction of the
sun for the centre of the earth, and of the hemisphere diametrically
opposite to him, were diminished by a difficulty in penetrating
the interposed matter, the tides would be more obviously
affected. Its attraction is the same also, whatever the substances
of the celestial bodies may be; for, if the action of the sun upon
the earth differed by a millionth part from his action upon the
moon, the difference would occasion a periodical variation in the
moon’s parallax, whose maximum would be the
1⁄15
of a second,
and also a variation in her longitude amounting to several seconds—a
supposition proved to be impossible by the agreement of
426theory with observation. Thus all matter is pervious to gravitation,
and is equally attracted by it.
Gravitation is a feeble force, vastly inferior to electric action,
chemical affinity, and cohesion; yet, as far as human knowledge
extends, the intensity of gravitation has never varied within the
limits of the solar system; nor does even analogy lead us to
expect that it should: on the contrary, there is every reason to
be assured that the great laws of the universe are immutable, like
their Author. Nor can we suppose the structure of the globe
alone to be exempt from the universal fiat of general laws, though
ages may pass before the changes it has undergone, or that are
now in progress, can be referred to existing causes with the same
certainty with which the motions of the planets, and all their
periodic and secular variations, are referable to the law of gravitation.
The traces of extreme antiquity perpetually occurring to
the geologist give that information, as to the origin of things, in
vain looked for in the other parts of the universe. They date the
beginning of time with regard to our system, since there is ground
to believe that the formation of the earth was contemporaneous
with that of the rest of the planets; but they show that creation
is the work of Him with whom “a thousand years are as one
day, and one day as a thousand years.”
In the work now brought to a conclusion, it has been necessary
to select from the whole circle of the sciences a few of the most
obvious of those proximate links which connect them together,
and to pass over innumerable cases both of evident and occult
alliance. Any one branch traced through its ramifications would
alone have occupied a volume; it is hoped, nevertheless, that
the view here given will suffice to show the extent to which a
consideration of the reciprocal influence of even a few of these
subjects may ultimately lead. It thus appears that the theory
of dynamics, founded upon terrestrial phenomena, is indispensable
for acquiring a knowledge of the revolutions of the celestial
bodies and their reciprocal influences. The motions of the
satellites are affected by the forms of their primaries, and the
figures of the planets themselves depend upon their rotations.
The symmetry of their internal structure proves the stability of
these rotatory motions, and the immutability of the length of the
day, which furnishes an invariable standard of time; and the
actual size of the terrestrial spheroid affords the means of ascertaining
427the dimensions of the solar system, and provides an
invariable foundation for a system of weights and measures. The
mutual attraction of the celestial bodies disturbs the fluids at
their surfaces, whence the theory of the tides and of the oscillations
of the atmosphere. The density and elasticity of the air,
varying with every alternation of temperature, lead to the consideration
of barometrical changes, the measurement of heights,
and capillary attraction; and the doctrine of sound, including the
theory of music, is to be referred to the small undulations of the
aërial medium. A knowledge of the action of matter upon light
is requisite for tracing the curved path of its rays through the
atmosphere, by which the true places of distant objects are determined,
whether in the heavens or on the earth. By this we learn
the nature and properties of the sunbeam, the mode of its propagation
through the ethereal medium, or in the interior of material
bodies, and the origin of colour. By the eclipses of Jupiter’s
satellites the velocity of light is ascertained; and that velocity,
in the aberration of the fixed stars, furnishes a direct proof of
the real motion of the earth (N. 237). The effects of the invisible
rays of the spectrum are immediately connected with chemical
action; and heat, forming a part of the solar ray, so essential to
animated and inanimated existence, is too important an agent in
the economy of creation not to hold a principal place in the connexion
of physical sciences; whence follows its distribution in
the interior and over the surface of the globe, its power on the
geological convulsions of our planet, its influence on the atmosphere
and on climate, and its effects on vegetable and animal life,
evinced in the localities of organized beings on the earth, in the
waters, and in the air. The correlation between molecular and
chemical action, light, heat, electricity, and magnetism, is continually
becoming more perfect, and there is every reason to
believe that these different modes of force, as well as gravity
itself, will ultimately be found to merge in one great and universal
power. Many more instances might be given in illustration of
the immediate connexion of the physical sciences, most of which
are united still more closely by the common bond of analysis,
which is daily extending its empire, and will ultimately embrace
almost every subject in nature in its formulæ.
These formulæ, emblematic of Omniscience, condense into a
428few symbols the immutable laws of the universe. This mighty
instrument of human power itself originates in the primitive
constitution of the human mind, and rests upon a few fundamental
axioms, which have eternally existed in Him who
implanted them in the breast of man when He created him after
His own image.</div></body></text></TEI>