<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="19">
153
SECTION XVIII.

Refraction—Astronomical Refraction and its Laws—Formation of Tables
of Refraction—Terrestrial Refraction—Its Quantity—Instances of
extraordinary Refraction—Reflection—Instances of extraordinary Reflection—Loss
of Light by the Absorbing Power of the Atmosphere—Apparent
Magnitude of Sun and Moon in the Horizon.
Not only everything we hear but all we see is through the
medium of the atmosphere. Without some knowledge of its
action upon light, it would be impossible to ascertain the position
of the heavenly bodies, or even to determine the exact place
of very distant objects upon the surface of the earth; for, in
consequence of the refractive power of the air, no distant object
is seen in its true position.
All the celestial bodies appear to be more elevated than they
really are; because the rays of light, instead of moving through
the atmosphere in straight lines, are continually inflected towards
the earth. Light passing obliquely out of a rare into a denser
medium, as from vacuum into air, or from air into water, is bent
or refracted from its course towards a perpendicular to that point
of the denser surface where the light enters it (N. 189). In the
same medium, the sine of the angle contained between the incident
ray and the perpendicular is in a constant ratio to
the sine of the angle contained by the refracted ray and the
same perpendicular; but this ratio varies with the refracting
medium. The denser the medium, the more the ray is bent.
The barometer shows that the density of the atmosphere decreases
as the height above the earth increases. Direct experiments
prove that the refractive power of the air increases with
its density. It follows therefore that, if the temperature be
uniform, the refractive power of the air is greatest at the earth’s
surface, and diminishes upwards.
A ray of light from a celestial object falling obliquely on this
variable atmosphere, instead of being refracted at once from its
course, is gradually more and more bent during its passage
through it so as to move in a vertical curved line, in the same
154manner as if the atmosphere consisted of an infinite number of
strata of different densities. The object is seen in the direction
of a tangent to that part of the curve which meets the eye; consequently
the apparent altitude (N. 190) of the heavenly bodies
is always greater than their true altitude. Owing to this circumstance,
the stars are seen above the horizon after they are
set, and the day is lengthened from a part of the sun being
visible, though he really is behind the rotundity of the earth.
It would be easy to determine the direction of a ray of light
through the atmosphere if the law of the density were known;
but, as this law is perpetually varying with the temperature,
the case is very complicated. When rays pass perpendicularly
from one medium into another, they are not bent; and experience
shows, that in the same surface, though the sines of
the angles of incidence and refraction retain the same ratio,
the refraction increases with the obliquity of incidence
(N. 189). Hence it appears that the refraction is greatest at the
horizon, and at the zenith there is none. But it is proved
that, at all heights above ten degrees, refraction varies nearly
as the tangent of the angular distance of the object from the
zenith, and wholly depends upon the heights of the barometer
and thermometer. For the quantity of refraction at the same
distance from the zenith varies nearly as the height of the barometer,
the temperature being constant; and the effect of the
variation of temperature is to diminish the quantity of refraction
by about its 480th part for every degree in the rise of Fahrenheit’s
thermometer. Not much reliance can be placed on celestial
observations, within less than ten or twelve degrees of the horizon,
on account of irregular variations in the density of the air near
the surface of the earth, which are sometimes the cause of very
singular phenomena. The humidity of the air produces no sensible
effect on its refractive power; and it has been proved that
the amount of refraction is the same whatever be the velocity of
the incident light, that is whether the light comes from a star in
that part of the heavens towards which the earth is going, or
from one in that part of the sky whence it is receding.
Bodies, whether luminous or not, are only visible by the rays
which proceed from them. As the rays must pass through strata
of different densities in coming to us, it follows that, with the
exception of stars in the zenith, no object either in or beyond our
155atmosphere is seen in its true place. But the deviation is so
small in ordinary cases that it causes no inconvenience, though
in astronomical and trigonometrical observations due allowance
must be made for the effects of refraction. Dr. Bradley’s tables
of refraction were formed by observing the zenith distances of
the sun at his greatest declinations, and the zenith distances of
the pole-star above and below the pole. The sum of these four
quantities is equal to 180°, diminished by the sum of the four
refractions, whence the sum of the four refractions was obtained;
and, from the law of the variation of refraction determined by
theory, he assigned the quantity due to each altitude (N. 191).
The mean horizontal refraction is about 35ʹ 6ʺ, and at the height
of forty-five degrees it is 58ʺ·36. The effect of refraction upon
the same star above and below the pole was noticed by Alhazen,
a Saracen astronomer of Spain, in the ninth century; but its
existence was known to Ptolemy in the second, though he was
ignorant of its quantity.
The refraction of a terrestrial object is estimated differently
from that of a celestial body. It is measured by the angle contained
between the tangent to the curvilineal path of the ray
where it meets the eye, and the straight line joining the eye and
the object (N. 192). Near the earth’s surface the path of the
ray may be supposed to be circular; and the angle at the centre
of the earth corresponding to this path is called the horizontal
angle. The quantity of terrestrial refraction is obtained by
measuring contemporaneously the elevation of the top of a mountain
above a point in the plain at its base, and the depression of
that point below the top of the mountain. The distance between
these two stations is the chord of the horizontal angle; and it is
easy to prove that double the refraction is equal to the horizontal
angle, increased by the difference between the apparent elevation
and the apparent depression. Whence it appears that, in the
mean state of the atmosphere, the refraction is about the fourteenth
part of the horizontal angle.
Some very singular appearances occur from the accidental
expansion or condensation of the strata of the atmosphere contiguous
to the surface of the earth, by which distant objects,
instead of being elevated, are depressed. Sometimes, being at
once both elevated and depressed, they appear double, one of the
images being direct, and the other inverted. In consequence of
156the upper edges of the sun and moon being less refracted than
the lower, they often appear to be oval when near the horizon.
The looming also or elevation of coasts, mountains, and ships,
when viewed across the sea, arises from unusual refraction. A
friend of the author’s, while standing on the plains of Hindostan,
saw the whole upper chain of the Himalaya Mountains start into
view, from a sudden change in the density of the air, occasioned
by a heavy shower after a very long course of dry and hot
weather. Single and double images of objects at sea, arising
from sudden changes of temperature which are not so soon communicated
to the water on account of its density as to the air,
occur more rarely and are of shorter duration than similar
appearances on land. In 1818 Captain Scoresby, whose observations
on the phenomena of the polar seas are so valuable, recognised
his father’s ship by its inverted image in the air, although
the vessel itself was below the horizon. He afterwards found
that she was seventeen miles beyond the horizon, and thirty
miles distant. Two images are sometimes seen suspended in the
air over a ship, one direct and the other inverted, with their topmasts
or their hulls meeting, according as the inverted image is
above or below the direct image (N. 193). Dr. Wollaston has
proved that these appearances are owing to the refraction of the
rays through media of different densities, by the very simple
experiment of looking along a red-hot poker at a distant object.
Two images are seen, one direct and another inverted, in consequence
of the change induced by the heat in the density of
the adjacent air. He produced the same effect by a saline or
saccharine solution with water and spirit of wine floating upon
it (N. 194).
Many of the phenomena that have been ascribed to extraordinary
refraction seem to be occasioned by a partial or total
reflection of the rays of light at the surfaces of strata of different
densities (N. 189). It is well known that, when light falls
obliquely upon the external surface of a transparent medium, as
on a plate of glass or a stratum of air, one portion is reflected
and the other transmitted. But, when light falls very obliquely
upon the internal surface, the whole is reflected, and not a ray is
transmitted. In all cases the angles made by the incident and
reflected rays with a perpendicular to the surface being equal,
as the brightness of the reflected image depends on the quantity
157of light, those arising from total reflection must be by far the
most vivid. The delusive appearance of water, so well known
to African travellers and to the Arab of the desert as the Lake
of the Gazelles, is ascribed to the reflection which takes place
between strata of air of different densities, owing to radiation of
heat from the arid sandy plains. The mirage described by Captain
Mundy in his Journal of a Tour in India probably arises
from this cause. “A deep precipitous valley below us, at the
bottom of which I had seen one or two miserable villages in the
morning, bore in the evening a complete resemblance to a
beautiful lake; the vapour which played the part of water ascending
nearly half way up the sides of the vale, and on its
bright surface trees and rocks being distinctly reflected. I had
not been long contemplating this phenomenon, before a sudden
storm came on and dropped a curtain of clouds over the scene.”
An occurrence which happened on the 18th of November,
1804, was probably produced by reflection. Dr. Buchan, while
watching the rising sun from the cliff about a mile to the east of
Brighton, at the instant the solar disc emerged from the surface
of the ocean, saw the cliff on which he was standing, a windmill,
his own figure and that of a friend, depicted immediately opposite
to him on the sea. This appearance lasted about ten
minutes, till the sun had risen nearly his own diameter above
the surface of the waves. The whole then seemed to be elevated
into the air, and successively vanished. The rays of the sun
fell upon the cliff at an incidence of 73° from the perpendicular,
and the sea was covered with a dense fog many yards in height,
which gradually receded before the rising sun. When extraordinary
refraction takes place laterally, the strata of variable
density are perpendicular to the horizon, and, if combined with
vertical refraction, the objects are magnified as when seen through
a telescope. From this cause, on the 26th of July, 1798, the
cliffs of France, fifty miles off, were seen as distinctly from Hastings
as if they had been close at hand; and even Dieppe was
said to have been visible in the afternoon.
The stratum of air in the horizon is so much thicker and more
dense than the stratum in the vertical, that the sun’s light is
diminished 1300 times in passing through it, which enables us
to look at him when setting without being dazzled. The loss of
light, and consequently of heat, by the absorbing power of the
158atmosphere, increases with the obliquity of incidence. Of ten
thousand rays falling on its surface, 8123 arrive at a given point
of the earth if they fall perpendicularly; 7024 arrive if the angle
of direction be fifty degrees; 2831, if it be seven degrees; and
only five rays will arrive through a horizontal stratum. Since
so great a quantity of light is lost in passing through the atmosphere,
many celestial objects are altogether invisible from
the plain, which may be seen from elevated situations. Diminished
splendour, and the false estimate we make of distance from
the number of intervening objects, lead us to suppose the sun
and moon to be much larger when in the horizon than at any
other altitude, though their apparent diameters are then somewhat
less. Instead of the sudden transitions of light and darkness,
the reflective power of the air adorns nature with the rosy
and golden hues of the Aurora and twilight. Even when the
sun is eighteen degrees below the horizon, a sufficient portion of
light remains to show that at the height of thirty miles it is
still dense enough to reflect light. The atmosphere scatters the
sun’s rays, and gives all the beautiful tints and cheerfulness of
day. It transmits the blue light in greatest abundance; the
higher we ascend, the sky assumes a deeper hue; but, in the
expanse of space, the sun and stars must appear like brilliant
specks in profound blackness.</div></body></text></TEI>