<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="16">
117
SECTION XV.

Analysis of the Atmosphere—Its Pressure—Law of Decrease in Density—Law
of Decrease in Temperature—Measurement of Heights by the
Barometer—Extent of the Atmosphere—Barometrical Variations—Oscillations—Trade-Winds—Cloud-Ring—Monsoons—Rotation of
Winds—Laws of Hurricanes.
The atmosphere is not homogeneous. It appears from analysis
that, of 100 parts, 99·5 consist of nitrogen and oxygen gases
mixed in the proportions of 79 to 21 of volume, the remainder
consists of 0·05 parts of carbonic acid and on an average 0·45 of
aqueous vapour. These proportions are found to be the same at
all heights hitherto attained by man. The air is an elastic fluid,
resisting pressure in every direction, and is subject to the law of
gravitation. As the space in the top of the tube of a barometer
is a vacuum, the column of mercury suspended by the pressure
of the atmosphere on the surface of that in the cistern is a
measure of its weight. Consequently every variation in the
density occasions a corresponding rise or fall in the barometrical
column. At the level of the sea in latitude 42°, and at the
temperature of melting ice, the mean height of the barometer is
29·922 or 30 inches nearly. The pressure of the atmosphere is
about fifteen pounds on every square inch; so that the surface
of the whole globe sustains a weight of 11,671,000,000 hundreds
of millions of pounds. Shell-fish, which have the power of
producing a vacuum, adhere to the rocks by a pressure of fifteen
pounds upon every square inch of contact.
The atmosphere when in equilibrio is an ellipsoid flattened at
the poles from its rotation with the earth. In that state its
strata are of uniform density at equal heights above the level of
the sea; but since the air is both heavy and elastic, its density
necessarily diminishes in ascending above the surface of the
earth; for each stratum of air is compressed only by the weight
above it. Therefore the upper strata are less dense because they
are less compressed than those below them. Whence it is easy
to show, supposing the temperature to be constant, that if the
118heights above the earth be taken in increasing arithmetical
progression, that is, if they increase by equal quantities, as by a
foot or a mile, the densities of the strata of air, or the heights of
the barometer which are proportionate to them, will decrease in
geometrical progression. For example, at the level of the sea if
the mean height of the barometer be 29·922 inches, at the height
of 18,000 feet it will be 14·961 inches, or one half as great; at
the height of 36,000 feet it will be one-fourth as great; at 54,000
feet it will be one-eighth, and so on. Sir John Herschel has shown
that the actual decrease is much more rapid, and that, in any hypothesis
that has been formed with regard to the divisibility of the
aërial atoms, a vacuum exists at the height of 80 or 90 miles above
the earth’s surface, inconceivably more perfect than any that can be
produced in the best air-pumps. Indeed the decrease in density is
so rapid that three-fourths of all the air contained in the atmosphere
is within four miles of the earth; and, as its superficial extent is
200 millions of square miles, its relative thickness is less than
that of a sheet of paper when compared with its breadth. The air
even on mountain tops is sufficiently rare to diminish the intensity
of sound, to affect respiration, and to occasion a loss of muscular
strength. The blood burst from the lips and ears of M. de
Humboldt as he ascended the Andes; and he experienced the
same difficulty in kindling and maintaining a fire at great heights
which Marco Polo, the Venetian, felt on the mountains of
Central Asia. M. Gay-Lussac ascended in a balloon to the
height of 4·36 miles, and he suffered greatly from the rarity of
the air. It is true that at the height of thirty-seven miles the
atmosphere is still dense enough to reflect the rays of the sun when
18° below the horizon; but the tails of comets show that extremely
attenuated matter is capable of reflecting light. And although,
at the height of fifty miles, the bursting of the meteor of 1783
was heard on earth like the report of a cannon, it only proves
the immensity of the explosion of a mass half a mile in diameter,
which could produce a sound capable of penetrating air three
thousand times more rare than that we breathe. But even these
heights are extremely small when compared with the radius of
the earth.
The density of the air is modified by various circumstances,
chiefly by changes of temperature, because heat dilates the air
and cold contracts it, varying
1⁄480
of the whole bulk when at 32°
119for every degree of Fahrenheit’s thermometer. Experience shows
that the heat of the air decreases as the height above the surface
of the earth increases. It appears that the mean temperature of
space is 226° below the zero point of Fahrenheit by the theories
of Fourier and Pouillet, but Sir John Herschel has computed it
to be -239° Fahr. from observations made during the ascent in
balloons. Such would probably be the temperature of the surface
of the earth also, were it not for the non-conducting power of
the air, whence it is enabled to retain the heat of the sun’s rays,
which the earth imbibes and radiates in all directions. The
decrease in heat is very irregular; each authority gives a
different estimate, because it varies with latitude and local
circumstances, but from the mean of five different statements it
seems to be about one degree for every 334 feet; the mean of
observations made in balloons is 400 feet, which is probably
nearer the truth. This is the cause of the severe cold and perpetual
snow on the summits of the alpine chains. In the year 1852 four
ascents in a balloon took place from the meteorological observatory
at Kew, in which the greatest height attained was 22,370 feet.
The observations then made by Mr. Welsh furnished Sir John
Herschel with data for computing that the temperature of space
is minus 239°, that is 239° below the zero point of Fahrenheit,
that the limiting temperature of the atmosphere is probably
771⁄2
degrees below that point at the equator, and
1191⁄2
below it at the
poles, with a range of temperature from the surface of
1611⁄2°
in
the former case, and
1191⁄2°
in the latter. During these ascents it
was found that the temperature of the air decreases uniformly
up to a certain point, where it is arrested and remains constant,
or increases through a depth of 2000 or 3000 feet, after which it
decreases again according to the same law as before. Throughout
this zone of constant temperature it either rains, or there is a
great fall in the dew point; in short, it is the region of clouds,
and the increase of temperature is owing to the latent or absorbed
heat set free by the condensation of the aqueous vapour. In the
latitude of Kew the cloud region begins at altitudes varying
between 2000 and 6500 feet, according to the state of the
weather.
Were it not for the effects of temperature on the density of the
air, the heights of mountains might be determined by the
barometer alone; but as the thermometer must also be consulted,
120the determination becomes more complicated. Mr. Ivory’s
method of computing heights from barometrical measurements
has the advantage of combining accuracy with the greatest
simplicity. Indeed the accuracy with which the heights of
mountains can be obtained by this method is very remarkable.
Admiral Smyth, R.N., and Sir John Herschel measured the
height of Etna by the barometer, without any communication
and in different years; Admiral Smyth made it 10,874 feet, and
Sir John Herschel 10,873, the difference being only one foot. In
consequence of the diminished pressure of the atmosphere water
boils at a lower temperature on mountain tops than in the
valleys, which induced Fahrenheit to propose this mode of
observation as a method of ascertaining their heights. It is very
simple, as Professor Forbes ascertained that the temperature of
the boiling point varies in arithmetical proportion with the
height, or 5495 feet for every degree of Fahrenheit, so that the
calculation of height becomes one of arithmetic only, without the
use of any table.
The mean pressure of the atmosphere is not the same all over
the globe. It is less by 0·24 of an inch at the equator than at
the tropics or in the higher latitudes, in consequence of the
ascent of heated air and vapour from the surface of the ocean. It
is less also on the shores of the Baltic Sea than it is in France,
and it was observed by Sir James C. Ross that throughout the
whole of the Antarctic Ocean, from 68° to 74° S. latitude, and
from 8° to 7° W. longitude, there is a depression of the barometer
amounting to an inch and upwards, which is equivalent to an
elevation above the sea level of 800 feet. A similar depression
was observed by M. Erman in the sea of Ochotzk, and in the
adjacent continent of eastern Siberia. Sir John Herschel assigns
as the cause of these singular anomalies the great system of
circulation of the trade and antetrade winds, in both hemispheres,
reacting upon the general mass of the continents as
obstacles in their path, which is modified by the configuration of
the land.
There are various periodic oscillations in the atmosphere, which,
rising and falling like waves in the sea, occasion corresponding
changes in the height of the barometer, but they differ as much
from the trade-winds, monsoons, and other currents, as the tides
of the sea do from the Gulf-stream and other oceanic rivers.
121The sun and moon disturb the equilibrium of the atmosphere by
their attraction, and produce annual undulations which have
their maximum altitudes at the equinoxes, and their minima at
the solstices. There are also lunar tides, which ebb and flow
twice in the course of a lunation. The diurnal tides, which
accomplish their rise and fall in six hours, are greatly modified
by the heat of the sun. Between the tropics the barometer
attains its maximum height about nine in the morning, then
sinks till three or four in the afternoon; it again rises and
attains a second maximum about nine in the evening, and then
it begins to fall, and reaches a second minimum at three in
the morning, again to pursue the same course. According to
M. Bouvard, the amount of the oscillations at the equator is
proportional to the temperature, and in other parallels it varies
as the temperature and the square of the cosine of the latitude
conjointly; consequently it decreases from the equator to the
poles, but it is somewhat greater in the day than in the night.
Besides these small undulations, there are vast waves perpetually
moving over the continents and oceans in separate and
independent systems, being confined to local, yet very extensive
districts, probably occasioned by long-continued rains or dry
weather over large tracts of country. By numerous barometrical
observations made simultaneously in both hemispheres, the
courses of several have been traced, some of which occupy
twenty-four, and others thirty-six, hours to accomplish their
rise and fall. One especially of these vast barometric waves,
many hundreds of miles in breadth, has been traced over the
greater part of Europe; and not its breadth only, but also the
direction of its front and its velocity, have been clearly ascertained.
Although, like all other waves, these are but moving
forms, yet winds arise dependent on them like tide streams in
the ocean. Mr. Birt has determined the periods of other waves
of still greater extent and duration, two of which required
seventeen days to rise and fall; and another which takes fourteen
days to complete its undulation, called by Mr. Birt the November
wave, passes annually over the British Islands, probably over
the whole of Europe and the seas on its northern coasts. Its
crest, which appears to be 6000 miles in extent, moves from
N.W. to S.E. at the rate of about 19 miles an hour; while the
extent of its barometrical elevation from its trough to its crest is
122seldom less than an inch, sometimes double that quantity. The
great crest is preceded and followed at about five days’ interval
by two lower ones, and the beginning and end are marked by
deep depressions. The researches of M. Leverrier leave no doubt
that the great Crimean storm of the 14th November, 1854, was
part of this phenomenon,[8] for even a very small difference of
atmospheric pressure is sufficient to raise a considerable wind.
Since each oscillation has its perfect effect independently of the
others, each one is marked by a change in the barometer, and
this is beautifully illustrated by curves constructed from a series
of observations. The general form of the curve shows the course
of the principal wave, while small undulations in its outline
mark the maxima and minima of the minor oscillations.
The trade-winds, which are the principal currents in the
atmosphere, are only a particular case of those very general
laws which regulate the motion of the winds depending on the
rarefaction of the air combined with the rotation of the earth on
its axis. They are permanent currents of wind between the
tropics, blowing to the N.E. on the N. side of the equator,
and to the S.E. on the S. side.
If currents of air come from the poles, it is clear that equilibrium
must be restored by counter-currents from the equator;
moreover, winds coming from the poles, where there is no rotation,
to the equator, which revolves from W. to E. at the rate
of 1000 miles an hour, must of necessity move in a direction
resulting from their own progressive motion and that of rotation;
hence, in blowing towards the equator the bias is to the
E., and in blowing from it the bias is to the W. Thus as N.
and S. winds from the poles blow along the surface from the
tropics to the equator, in consequence of this composition of
motions that from the N. becomes the N.E. trade-wind, and
that from the S. the S.E. trade-wind. Now these winds being
in contrary directions cross at the equator, balance each other
through about 6 degrees of latitude, and produce a belt of calms
of that breadth encircling the globe, known as the calms of the
equator, or the Variables of seamen. The heat of the sun
rarefies the air so much, that the trade-winds, after crossing at
the equator, ascend into the higher regions of the atmosphere,
where that from the N. goes to the tropic of Capricorn, and
123that from the S. to the tropic of Cancer. But while travelling
in these lofty regions they become cold and heavy, and, sinking
to the surface at the tropics, each proceeds to the opposite pole
from which it set out. Now, however, they have a greater rotatory
motion than the places they successively arrive at, so the
bias is to the W., and they become the N.W. and S.W. extra-tropical
winds.
If on arriving at the poles the air were to accumulate there,
the circulation of the winds would cease; but currents rise into
the upper regions, and flow back again to the tropics, where
they sink down to fill the vacuum caused by the great precipitation
of vapour in these regions, and then flow to the equator as
trade-winds (N. 177). So the currents of air cross again at
the tropics and produce two belts of calms which surround
the globe, named by Lieutenant Maury the Calms of Cancer
and the Calms of Capricorn, but generally known to sailors as
the Doldrums. Thus the winds go from pole to pole and back
again, alternately as under and upper currents. In their
circuits the winds cross each other five times, producing regions
of calms at the poles, the tropics, and equator. The trade-winds
generally extend for about 28° on each side of the equator, but,
on account of the greater quantity of land in the northern hemisphere,
the N.E. trade-wind is narrower than the S.E.
The sun is perpetually raising enormous quantities of vapour
from the ocean which the trade-winds carry to the equator:
it is condensed when it rises with the air into the higher
strata, and forms a ring of clouds along the southern side of the
belt of equatorial calms that surrounds the earth, which, during
the day, is perpetually pouring down torrents of rain, while the
sun continually beating upon its upper surface dissolves the clouds
into invisible vapour which is carried by the winds and condensed
into rain on the extra-tropical regions. The whole system of
trade-winds, equatorial and tropical calms, with the cloud ring,
follow the sun in declination; consequently in its journeys back
and forwards it annually travels over 1000 miles of latitude, and
regulates the dry and rainy season in the tropical parts of the
earth.
The monsoons, which are periodic winds in the Indian Ocean,
in part depend upon this movement. For when the sun is in the
northern hemisphere the trade-winds come northward with him;
124and when his intense heat expands the air over the Great Gobi
and other arid Asiatic deserts, it ascends; the N.E. trade-wind is
drawn in to fill the vacuum and ascends with it; then the S.E.
trade-wind, being no longer met and balanced by the N.E. trade,
passes into the northern hemisphere, and as it proceeds northward
from the equator it is deflected to the west by the rotation
of the earth, combined with the indraught over the heated
deserts, and becomes the S.W. monsoon, which blows while the
sun is north of the equator, but as soon as he goes south, and no
longer rarefies the air over the Indian deserts, the S.E. trade-wind
resumes its usual course, and is then known as the S.E.
monsoon. The influence of the heated deserts is perceptible to
the distance of 1000 miles from the shore; the monsoons prevail
with great steadiness over the Arabian Gulf, the Indian Ocean,
and part of the China Sea. At the change, torrents of rain and
violent thunderstorms accompany the conflict between the contending
winds.
The Sahara desert in North Africa, and those of Utah, Texas,
and New Mexico, occasion the monsoons which prevail in the
North Atlantic and on both sides of Central America, and the
monsoons which blow to the north of Australia show the sterility
of the interior, even if other proofs were wanting. From the
powerful effect of the land in drawing off the winds from their
course, it may be seen why the N.E. trade-winds are narrower
than the S.E. trades.
In the extra-tropical winds in the North Atlantic, which blow
from the 40th parallel to the pole, the north-westerly are to the
easterly as 2 to 1: hence there would be an accumulation of air at
the pole at the expense of the equator, did not a current rise at
the pole and return to the equator through the high regions of
the atmosphere, which confirms the theory of the rotation of the
wind.
There are many proofs of the existence of the counter-currents
above the trade-winds. On the Peak of Teneriffe the prevailing
winds are from the west. Light clouds have frequently been seen
moving rapidly from west to east at a very great height above
the trade-winds, which were sweeping along the surface of the
ocean in a contrary direction. Rains, clouds, and nearly all the
other atmospheric phenomena, occur below the height of 18,000
feet, and generally much nearer to the surface of the earth.
125They are owing to currents of air running upon each other in
horizontal strata, differing in their electric state, in temperature
and moisture, as well as in velocity and direction.
When north and south winds blow alternately, the wind at
any place will veer in one uniform direction through every point
of the compass, provided the one begins before the other has
ceased. In the northern hemisphere a north wind sets out with
a smaller degree of rotatory motion than the places have at which
it successively arrives, consequently it passes through all the
points of the compass from N. to N.E. and E. A current from
the south, on the contrary, sets out with a greater rotatory
velocity than the places have at which it successively arrives, so
by the rotation of the earth it is deflected from S. to S.W. and W.
Now, if the vane at any place should have veered from the N.
through N.E. to E., and a south wind should spring up, it would
combine its motion with the former and cause the vane to turn
successively from the E. to S.E. and S. But by the earth’s rotation
this south wind will veer to the S.W. and W., and, if a
north wind should now arise, it would combine its motion with
that of the west, and cause it to veer to the N.W. and N. Thus
two alternations of north and south wind will cause the vane at
any place to go completely round the compass, from N. to E.,
S., W., and N. again. At the Royal Observatory at Greenwich
the wind accomplishes five circuits in that direction in the course
of a year. When circumstances combine to produce alternate
north and south winds in the southern hemisphere, the gyration
is in the contrary direction. Although the general tendency of
the wind may be rotatory, and is so in many instances, at least
for part of the year, yet it is so often counteracted by local circumstances,
that the winds are in general very irregular, every
disturbance in atmospheric equilibrium from heat or any other
cause producing a corresponding wind. The most prevalent winds
in Europe are the N.E. and S.W.; the former arises from the
north polar current, and the latter from causes already mentioned.
The law of the wind’s rotation was first described by Dr. Dalton,
but has been developed by Professor Dove, of Berlin.
Hurricanes are those storms of wind in which the portion of
the atmosphere that forms them revolves in a horizontal circuit
round a vertical or somewhat inclined axis of rotation, while the
axis itself, and consequently the whole storm, is carried forward
126along the surface of the globe, so that the direction in which the
storm is advancing is quite different from the direction in which
the rotatory current may be blowing at any point. In the West
Indies, where hurricanes are frequent and destructive, they
generally originate in the tropical regions near the inner boundary
of the trade-winds, and are caused by the vertical ascent of a
column of rarefied air, whose place is supplied by a rush of wind
from the surrounding regions, set into gyration by the rotation of
the earth. By far the greater number of Atlantic hurricanes
have begun eastward of the lesser Antilles or Caribbean Islands.
In every case the axis of the storm moves in an elliptical or
parabolic curve, having its vertex in or near the tropic of Cancer,
which marks the external limit of the trade-winds north of the
equator. As the motion before it reaches the tropic is in a
straight line from S.E. to N.W., and after it has passed it from
S.W. to N.E., the bend of the curve is turned towards Florida
and the Carolinas. In the southern hemisphere the body of the
storm moves in exactly the opposite direction. The hurricanes
which originate south of the equator, and whose initial path is
from N.E. to S.W., bend round at the tropic of Capricorn, and
then move from N.W. to S.E.
The extent and velocity of these storms are great; for instance,
the hurricane that took place on the 12th of August, 1830,
was traced from eastward of the Caribbee Islands, along the
Gulf Stream, to the bank of Newfoundland, a distance of more
than 3000 miles, which it passed over in six days. Although
the hurricane of the 1st of September, 1821, was not so extensive,
its velocity was greater, as it moved at the rate of 30 miles
an hour: small storms are generally more rapid than those of
greater dimensions.
The action of these storms seems to be at first confined to the
stratum of air nearest the earth, and then they seldom appear to
be more than a mile high, though sometimes they are raised
higher; or even divided by a mountain into two separate storms,
each of which continues its new path and gyrations with increased
violence. This occurred in the gale of the 25th of December,
1821, in the Mediterranean, when the Spanish mountains and
the Maritime Alps became new centres of motion.
By the friction of the earth the axis of the storm bends a little
forward. This causes a continual intermixture of the lower and
127warmer strata of air with those that are higher and colder, producing
torrents of rain and violent electric explosions.
The breadth of the whirlwind is greatly augmented when the
path of the storm changes on crossing the tropic. The vortex
of a storm has covered an extent of the surface of the globe 500
miles in diameter.
The revolving motion accounts for the sudden and violent
changes observed during hurricanes. In consequence of the
rotation of the air, the wind blows in opposite directions on each
side of the axis of the storm, and the violence of the blast
increases from the circumference towards the centre of gyration,
but in the centre itself the air is in repose: hence, when the
body of the storm passes over a place, the wind begins to blow
moderately, and increases to a hurricane as the centre of the
whirlwind approaches; then, in a moment, a dead and awful
calm succeeds, suddenly followed by a renewal of the storm in
all its violence, but now blowing in a direction diametrically
opposite to its former course. This happened at the Island of
St. Thomas on the 2nd of August, 1837, where the hurricane
increased in violence till half-past seven in the morning, when
perfect stillness took place for forty minutes, after which the
storm recommenced in a contrary direction.
The sudden fall of the mercury in the barometer in the regions
habitually visited by hurricanes is a certain indication of a coming
tempest. In consequence of the centrifugal force of these
rotatory storms the air becomes rarefied, and, as the atmosphere
is disturbed to some distance beyond the actual circle of gyration
or limits of the storm, the barometer often sinks some hours
before its arrival, from the original cause of the rotatory disturbance.
It continues sinking under the first half of the hurricane,
is at a maximum sometimes of two inches in the centre of
gyration, and again rises during the passage of the latter half,
though it does not attain its greatest height till the storm is over.
The diminution of atmospheric pressure is greater and extends
over a wider area in the temperate zones than in the torrid, on
account of the sudden expansion of the circle of rotation when
the gale crosses the tropic.
As the fall of the barometer gives warning of the approach of
a hurricane, so the laws of the storm’s motion afford the seaman
knowledge to guide him in avoiding it. In the northern
128temperate zone, if the gale begins from the S.E. and veers by S.
to W., the ship should steer to the S.E.; but, if the gale begins
from the N.E., and changes through N. to N.W., the vessel
should go to the N.W. In the northern part of the torrid zone,
if the storm begin from the N.E., and veer through E. to S.E.,
the ship should steer to the N.E.; but, if it begin from the N.W.,
and veer by W. to S.W., the ship should steer to the S.W.,
because she is in the south-western side of the storm. Since the
laws of storms are reversed in the southern hemisphere, the rules
for steering vessels are necessarily reversed also. A heavy swell
is peculiarly characteristic of these storms. In the open sea the
swell often extends many leagues beyond the range of the gale
which produced it.
Waterspouts are occasioned by small whirlwinds, which always
have their origin at a great distance from that part of the sea
from which the spout begins to rise, where it is generally calm.
The whirl is produced by two currents of air, which, running in
opposite directions, compress one another by their impetus, so
that they rise in spiral eddies to the clouds. They move slowly
along the surface of the sea, sometimes in vertical, and sometimes
in twisted spirals, putting the sea into violent agitation as
they pass, and carrying the water aloft by the force of gyration.
Occasionally the eddies begin in the clouds and dip down to
the sea.</div></body></text></TEI>