<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="15">
102
SECTION XIV.

Molecular Forces—Permanency of the ultimate Particles of Matter—Interstices—Mossotti’s
Theory—Rankin’s Theory of Molecular Vortices—Gases
reduced to Liquids by Pressure—Gravitation of Particles—Cohesion—Crystallization—Cleavage—Isomorphism—Minuteness
of the Particles—Height of Atmosphere—Chemical Affinity—Definite
Proportions and Relative Weights of Atoms—Faraday’s Discovery
with regard to Affinity—Capillary Attraction.
The oscillations of the atmosphere, and its action upon the rays
of light coming from the heavenly bodies, connect the science of
astronomy with the equilibrium and movements of fluids and the
laws of molecular attraction. Hitherto that force has been under
consideration which acts upon masses of matter at sensible distances;
but now the effects of such forces are to be considered as
act at inappreciable distances upon the ultimate molecules of
material bodies.
All substances consist of an assemblage of material particles, or
molecules, which are far too small to be visible by any means
human ingenuity has yet been able to devise, and which are much
beyond the limits of our perceptions. They neither can be created
nor destroyed; bodies may be burned, but their particles are not
consumed—they are merely liberated from one combination to
enter into another, nor are their peculiar properties ever changed;
whatever combinations they may enter into, they are ever and
invariably the same.
Since every known substance may be reduced in bulk by pressure,
it follows that the particles of matter are not in actual
contact, but are separated by interstices; and it is evident that the
smaller the interstitial spaces the greater the density. These
spaces appear to be filled with air in some cases, as may be
inferred from certain semi-opaque minerals and other substances
becoming transparent when plunged into water. Sometimes they
may possibly contain some unknown and highly elastic fluid,
such as Sir David Brewster has discovered in the minute cavities
of various minerals, which occasionally causes them to explode
103under the hands of the lapidary; but as it is inconceivable that
the particles of matter should act upon one another without some
means of communication, it is presumed that the interstices of
material substances contain a portion of the ethereal medium with
which the regions of space are filled.
The various hypotheses that have been formed as to the nature
and action of the forces which unite the particles of matter, have
been successively given up as science advanced, and now nothing
decisive has been attained, although Professor Mossotti, of Pisa,
by a very able analysis, has endeavoured to prove the identity of
the cohesive force with gravitation. As the particles of material
bodies are not in actual contact, he supposes that each is surrounded
by an atmosphere of the ethereal medium, which he
conceives to be electricity; moreover he assumes that the atoms
of the medium repel one another, that the particles of matter also
repel one another, but with less intensity, and that there is a
mutual attraction between the particles of matter and the atoms
of the medium, forces which are assumed to vary inversely as the
square of the distance.
Hence, when the material molecules of a body are inappreciably
near to one another, they mutually repel each other with a force
which diminishes rapidly as the infinitely small distance between
the material molecules augments, and at last vanishes. When
the molecules are still farther apart, the force becomes attractive.
At that particular point where the change takes place the forces
of repulsion and attraction balance each other, so that the molecules
of a body are neither disposed to approach nor recede, but
remain in equilibrio. If we try to press them nearer, the repulsive
force resists the attempt; and if we endeavour to break the
body so as to tear the particles asunder, the attractive force predominates
and keeps them together. This is what constitutes the
cohesive force, or force of aggregation, by which the molecules of
all substances are united. The limits of the distance at which
the negative action becomes positive vary according to the temperature
and nature of the molecules, and determine whether the
body which they form be solid, liquid, or aëriform.
Beyond this neutral point the attractive force increases as the
distance between the molecules augments till it attains a maximum;
when the particles are more apart, it diminishes; and, as
soon as they are separated by finite or sensible distances, it varies
104directly as their mass and inversely as the square of the distance,
which is precisely the law of universal gravitation.
Thus, on the hypothesis that the mutual repulsion between the
electric atoms is a little more powerful than the mutual repulsion
between the particles of matter, the ether and the matter attract
each other with unequal intensities, which leaves an excess of
attractive force constituting gravitation. As the gravitating force
is in operation wherever there is matter, the ethereal electric
medium must encompass all the bodies in the universe; and, as
it is utterly incomprehensible that the celestial bodies should
exert a reciprocal attraction through a void, the Professor concludes
that the ethereal electrical medium fills all space.
It is true that this connexion between the molecular forces and
gravitation depends upon hypothesis; but in the greater number
of physical investigations some hypothesis is requisite in the
first instance to aid the imperfection of our senses; and when the
phenomena of nature accord with the assumption, we are justified
in believing it to be a general law.
Mr. Rankin’s theory of molecular vortices, or the molecular
structure of matter, is independent of electricity. According to
his hypothesis, each atom of matter consists of an inappreciably
small nucleus, encompassed by an elastic ethereal atmosphere
which is retained in its position by attractive forces directed
towards the molecule, whilst the molecules attract each other in
the direction of straight lines joining their centres. The nuclei
may either be solid, or a high condensation of the atmospheres
which surround each with decreasing density. When the attraction
between the molecules is such that the elasticity of the atmospheres
is insensible, the body is a perfect solid, the rigidity of
which bears a certain definite proportion to the elasticity of the
volume. When the atmospheres are less condensed and the
attraction of the molecules merely produces a cohesive force
sufficient to balance the atomic elasticity of the atmosphere, the
body is a perfect liquid; and when the attraction of the molecules
is very small compared with the elasticity of their ethereal atmospheres,
the body is a perfect gas. These atmospheres are
supposed to be portions of the ethereal medium which penetrates
into the interstices of every substance, and their elasticity to be
due to the heat generated by the centrifugal force or oscillations
among their atoms, for motion is the cause of heat, the force
105producing the motions varying simply as the density of the
ether.
In aëriform fluids, although the particles are more remote from
each other than in liquids and solids, yet the pressure may be so
great as to reduce an aëriform fluid to a liquid, and a liquid to a
solid. Dr. Faraday has reduced some of the gases to a liquid
state by very great compression; but although atmospheric air
is capable of a diminution of volume to which we do not know a
limit, it has hitherto always retained its gaseous qualities, and
resumes its primitive volume the instant the pressure is removed.
Substances are said to be more or less elastic, according to the
facility with which they regain their bulk or volume when the
pressure is removed; thus liquids resist compression on account
of their elasticity, and in solids the resistance is much greater but
variable, and the effort required to break a substance is a measure
of the cohesive force exerted by its particles. In stone, iron, steel,
and all brittle and hard substances, the cohesion of the particles
is powerful but of small extent; in elastic bodies, on the contrary,
its action is weak, but more extensive. An infinite variety
of conditions may be observed in the fusion of metals and other
substances passing from hardness to toughness, viscidity, and
through all the other stages to perfect fluidity and even to vapour.
Since all bodies expand by heat, the cohesive force is weakened
by increase of temperature. The cohesion of matter or the
strength of substances forms an important branch of study in
engineering.
Every particle of matter, whether it forms a constituent part
of a solid, liquid, or aëriform fluid, is subject to the law of gravitation.
The weight of the atmosphere, of gases and vapour,
shows that they consist of gravitating particles. In liquids the
cohesive force is not sufficiently powerful to resist the action of
gravitation. Therefore, although their component particles still
maintain their connexion, the liquid is scattered by their weight,
unless when it is confined in a vessel or has already descended to
the lowest point possible, and assumed a level surface from the
mobility of its particles and the influence of the gravitating
forces, as in the ocean, or a lake. Solids would also fall to pieces
by the weight of their particles, if the force of cohesion were not
powerful enough to resist the efforts of gravitation.
The phenomena arising from the force of cohesion are innumerable.
106The spherical form of rain-drops; the difficulty of
detaching a plate of glass from the surface of water; the force
with which two plane surfaces adhere when pressed together;
the drops that cling to the window-glass in a shower of rain—are
all effects of cohesion entirely independent of atmospheric
pressure, and are included in the same analytical formula
(N. 162) which expresses all the circumstances accurately,
although the laws according to which the forces of cohesion and
repulsion vary are unknown. It is more than probable that the
spherical form of the sun and planets is due to the force of
cohesion, as they have every appearance of having been at one
period in a state of fusion.
A very remarkable instance has occasionally been observed
in plate-glass manufactories. After the large plates of glass
of which mirrors are to be made have received their last polish,
they are carefully wiped and laid on their edges with their
surfaces resting on one another. In the course of time the
cohesion has sometimes been so powerful, that they could not be
separated without breaking. Instances have occurred where two
or three have been so perfectly united, that they have been cut
and their edges polished as if they had been fused together; and
so great was the force required to make the surfaces slide that
one tore off a portion of the surface of the other.
In liquids and gases the forms of the particles have no influence,
they are so far apart; but the structure of solids varies
according to the sides which the particles present to one another
during their aggregation. Nothing is known of their form further
than the dissimilarity of their different sides in certain cases,
which appears from their reciprocal attractions during crystallisation
being more or less powerful according to the sides
they present to one another. Crystallisation is an effect of
molecular attraction regulated by certain laws, according to
which atoms of the same kind of matter unite in regular forms—a
fact easily proved by dissolving a piece of alum in pure water.
The mutual attraction of the particles is destroyed by the water;
but, if it be evaporated, they unite, and form in uniting eight-sided
figures called octahedrons (N. 163). These however are
not all the same. Some have their angles cut off, others their
edges, and some both, while the remainder take the regular form.
It is quite clear that the same circumstances which cause the
107aggregation of a few particles would, if continued, cause the
addition of more; and the process would go on as long as any
particles remain free round the primitive nucleus, which would
increase in size, but would remain unchanged in form, the figure
of the particles being such as to maintain the regularity and
smoothness of the surfaces of the solid and their mutual inclinations.
A broken crystal will by degrees resume its regular
figure when put back again into the solution of alum, which
shows that the internal and external particles are similar, and
have a similar attraction for the particles held in solution. The
original conditions of aggregation which make the molecules of
the same substance unite in different forms must be very numerous,
since of carbonate of lime alone there are many hundred
varieties; and certain it is, from the motion of polarised light
through rock crystal, that a very different arrangement of
particles is requisite to produce an extremely small change in
external form. A variety of substances in crystallising combine
chemically with a certain portion of water which in a dry state
forms an essential part of their crystals, and, according to the
experiments of MM. Haidinger and Mitscherlich, seems in some
cases to give the peculiar determination to their constituent molecules.
These gentlemen have observed that the same substance
crystallising at different temperatures unites with different quantities
of water and assumes a corresponding variety of forms.
Seleniate of zinc, for example, unites with three different portions
of water, and assumes three different forms, according as its
temperature in the act of crystallising is hot, lukewarm, or cold.
Sulphate of soda also, which crystallises at 90° of Fahrenheit
without water of crystallisation, combines with water at the
ordinary temperature, and takes a different form. Heat appears
to have a great influence on the phenomena of crystallisation, not
only when the particles of matter are free, but even when firmly
united, for it dissolves their union, and gives them another determination.
Professor Mitscherlich found that prismatic crystals
of sulphate of nickel (N. 164), exposed to a summer’s sun in a
close vessel, had their internal structure so completely altered
without any exterior change, that when broken open they were
composed internally of octahedrons with square bases. The
original aggregation of the internal particles had been dissolved,
and a disposition given to arrange themselves in a crystalline
108form. Crystals of sulphate of magnesia and of sulphate of zinc,
gradually heated in alcohol till it boils, lose their transparency
by degrees, and when opened are found to consist of innumerable
minute crystals totally different in form from the whole crystals;
and prismatic crystals of zinc (N. 165) are changed in a few
seconds into octahedrons by the heat of the sun: other instances
might be given of the influence of even moderate degrees of temperature
on molecular attraction in the interior of substances.
It must be observed that these experiments give entirely new
views with regard to the constitution of solid bodies. We are
led from the mobility of fluids to expect great changes in the
relative positions of their molecules, which must be in perpetual
motion even in the stillest water or calmest air; but we were not
prepared to find motion to such an extent in the interior of
solids. That their particles are brought nearer by cold and
pressure, or removed farther from one another by heat, might be
expected; but it could not have been anticipated that their
relative positions could be so entirely changed as to alter their
mode of aggregation. It follows, from the low temperature at
which these changes are effected, that there is probably no portion
of inorganic matter that is not in a state of relative motion.
Professor Mitscherlich’s discoveries with regard to the forms of
crystallised substances, as connected with their chemical character,
have thrown additional light on the constitution of
material bodies. There is a certain set of crystalline forms which
are not susceptible of variation, as the die or cube (N. 166),
which may be small or large, but is invariably a solid bounded
by six square surfaces or planes. Such also is the tetrahedron
(N. 167) or four-sided solid contained by four equal-sided
triangles. Several other solids belong to this class, which is
called the Tessular system of crystallisation. There are other
crystals which, though bounded by the same number of sides,
and having the same form, are yet susceptible of variation; for
instance, the eight-sided figure with a square base, called an
octahedron (N. 168), which is sometimes flat and low, and sometimes
acute and high. It was formerly believed that identity of
form in all crystals not belonging to the Tessular system indicated
identity of chemical composition. Professor Mitscherlich,
however, has shown that substances differing to a certain degree
in chemical composition have the property of assuming the same
109crystalline form. For example, the neutral phosphate of soda
and the arseniate of soda crystallise in the very same form,
contain the same quantities of acid, alkali, and water of crystallisation;
yet they differ so far, that one contains arsenic and the
other an equivalent quantity of phosphorus. Substances having
such properties are said to be isomorphous, that is, equal in form.
Of these there are many groups, each group having the same
form, and similarity though not identity of chemical composition.
For instance, one of the isomorphous groups is that consisting
of certain chemical substances called the protoxides of iron,
copper, zinc, nickel, and manganese, all of which are identical in
form and contain the same quantity of oxygen, but differ in the
respective metals they contain, which are, however, nearly in the
same proportion in each. All these circumstances tend to prove
that substances having the same crystalline form must consist of
ultimate atoms having the same figure and arranged in the very
same order; so that the form of crystals is dependent on their
atomic constitution.
All crystallised bodies have joints called cleavages, at which
they split more easily than in other directions; on this property
the whole art of cutting diamonds depends. Each substance
splits in a manner and in forms peculiar to itself. For example,
all the hundreds of forms of carbonate of lime split into six-sided
figures, called rhombohedrons (N. 169), whose alternate angles
measure 105·55° and 75·05°, however far the division may be
carried; therefore the ultimate particle of carbonate of lime is
presumed to have that form. However this may be, it is certain
that all the various crystals of that mineral may be formed by
building up six-sided solids of the form described, in the same
manner as children build houses with miniature bricks. It may
be imagined that a wide difference may exist between the particles
of an unformed mass and a crystal of the same substance—between
the common shapeless limestone and the pure and
limpid crystal of Iceland spar; yet chemical analysis detects
none; their ultimate atoms are identical, and crystallisation
shows that the difference arises only from the mode of aggregation.
Besides, all substances either crystallise naturally, or may
be made to do so by art. Liquids crystallise in freezing, vapours
by sublimation (N. 170); and hard bodies, when fused, crystallise
in cooling. Hence it may be inferred that all substances are
110composed of atoms, on whose magnitude, density, and form,
their nature and qualities depend; and, as these qualities are
unchangeable, the ultimate particles of matter must be incapable
of wear—the same now as when created.
The size of the ultimate particles of matter must be small in
the extreme. Organised beings, possessing life and all its functions,
have been discovered so small, that a million of them
would occupy less space than a grain of sand. The malleability
of gold, the perfume of musk, the odour of flowers, and many
other instances might be given of the excessive minuteness of the
atoms of matter. Supposing the density of the air at the surface
of the earth to be represented by unity, Sir John Herschel has
shown that, under any hypothesis as to its atoms, it would require
a fraction having at least 1370 figures in its denominator
to express its tenuity in the interplanetary space; yet the
definite proportions of chemical compounds afford a proof that
divisibility of matter has a limit. The cohesive force, which
has been the subject of the preceding considerations, only unites
particles of the same kind of matter; whereas affinity, which
is the cause of chemical compounds, is the mutual attraction
between particles of different kinds of matter, generally
producing a compound which has no sensible property in common
with its component parts except that of their combined gravity,
as, for example, water, which is a compound of oxygen and
hydrogen gases. It is merely a result of the electrical state of
the particles, chemical affinity and electricity being only forms of
the same power. In most cases it produces electricity, as in
the oxidation of metals and combustion, and in every case without
exception heat is evolved by bodies while combining chemically;
and as heat is an expansive force, chemical action is changed
into mechanical expansion, but it is not known in this case why
heat is produced, nor the manner in which the particles act.
It is a permanent and universal law in vast numbers of unorganised
bodies that their composition is definite and invariable,
the same compound always consisting of the same elements
united together in the same proportions. Two substances may
indeed be mixed; but they will not combine to form a third
substance different from both, unless their component particles
unite in definite proportions; that is to say, one part by weight
of one of the substances will unite with one part by weight of the
111other, or with two parts, or three, or four, &c., so as to form a
new substance; but in any other proportions they will only be
mechanically mixed. For example, one part by weight of
hydrogen gas will combine with eight parts by weight of oxygen
gas, and form water; or it will unite with sixteen parts by
weight of oxygen, and form a substance called deutoxide of
hydrogen; but, added to any other weight of oxygen, it will
produce one or both of these compounds mingled with the portion
of oxygen or hydrogen in excess. The law of definite proportion
established by Dr. Dalton, on the principle that every compound
body consists of a combination of the atoms of its constituent
parts, is of universal application, and is in fact one of the most
important discoveries in physical science, furnishing information
previously unhoped for with regard to the most secret and
minute operations of nature, in disclosing the relative weights of
the ultimate atoms of matter. Thus an atom of oxygen uniting
with an atom of hydrogen forms the compound water; but, as
every drop of water however small consists of eight parts by
weight of oxygen and one part by weight of hydrogen, it follows
that an atom of oxygen is eight times heavier than an atom of
hydrogen. In the same manner sulphuretted hydrogen gas
consists of sixteen parts by weight of sulphur and one of hydrogen;
therefore an atom of sulphur is sixteen times heavier than
an atom of hydrogen. Also carbonic oxide is constituted of six
parts by weight of carbon and eight of oxygen; and, as an atom
of oxygen has eight times the weight of an atom of hydrogen, it
follows that an atom of carbon is six times heavier than one of
hydrogen. Since the same definite proportion holds in the
composition of a vast number of substances that have been
examined, it has been concluded that there are great differences
in the weights of the ultimate particles of matter. Although
Dalton’s law is fully established, yet instances have occurred
from which it appears that the atomic theory deduced from it is
not always maintained. M. Gay Lussac discovered that gases
unite together by their bulk or volumes, in such simple and
definite proportions as one to one, one to two, one to three, &c.
For example, one volume or measure of oxygen unites with two
volumes or measures of hydrogen in the formation of water.
Dr. Faraday has proved, by experiments on bodies both in
solution and fusion, that chemical affinity is merely a result of
112the electrical state of the particles of matter. Now it must be
observed that the composition of bodies, as well as their decomposition,
may be accomplished by means of electricity; and Dr.
Faraday has found that this chemical composition and decomposition,
by a given current of electricity, is always accomplished
according to the laws of definite proportions; and that the
quantity of electricity requisite for the decomposition of a substance
is exactly the quantity necessary for its composition.
Thus the quantity of electricity which can decompose a grain
weight of water is exactly equal to the quantity of electricity
which unites the elements of that grain of water together, and is
equivalent to the quantity of atmospheric electricity which is
active in a very powerful flash of lightning. This law is
universal, and of that high and general order which characterises
all great discoveries. Chemical force is extremely powerful. A
pound of the best coal gives when burnt sufficient heat to raise
the temperature of 8086 pounds of water one Centigrade degree,
whence Professor Helmholtz of Bonn has computed that the
magnitude of the chemical force of attraction between the
particles of a pound of coal and the quantity of oxygen that
corresponds to it, is capable of lifting a weight of 100 pounds to
the height of 20 miles.
Dr. Faraday has given a singular instance of cohesive force
inducing chemical combination, by the following experiment,
which seems to be nearly allied to the discovery made by M.
Dœbereiner, in 1823, of the spontaneous combustion of spongy
platinum (N. 171) exposed to a stream of hydrogen gas mixed with
common air. A plate of platinum with extremely clean surfaces,
when plunged into oxygen and hydrogen gas mixed in the proportions
which are found in the constitution of water, causes the
gases to combine and water to be formed, the platinum to become
red-hot, and at last an explosion to take place; the only conditions
necessary for this curious experiment being excessive
purity in the gases and in the surface of the plate. A sufficiently
pure metallic surface can only be obtained by immersing the
platinum in very strong hot sulphuric acid and then washing it in
distilled water, or by making it the positive pole of a galvanic pile
in dilute sulphuric acid. It appears that the force of cohesion, as
well as the force of affinity, exerted by particles of matter, extends
to all the particles within a very minute distance. Hence the
113platinum, while drawing the particles of the two gases towards its
surface by its great cohesive attraction, brings them so near to
one another that they come within the sphere of their mutual
affinity, and a chemical combination takes place. Dr. Faraday
attributes the effect in part also to a diminution in the elasticity of
the gaseous particles on their sides adjacent to the platinum, and
to their perfect mixture or association, as well as to the positive
action of the metal in condensing them against its surface by its
attractive force. The particles when chemically united run off
the surface of the metal in the form of water by their gravitation,
or pass away as aqueous vapour and make way for others.
The oscillations of the atmosphere, and the changes in its
temperature, are measured by variations in the heights of the
barometer and thermometer. But the actual length of the liquid
columns depends not only upon the force of gravitation, but upon
the cohesive force or reciprocal attraction between the molecules
of the liquid and those of the tube containing it. This peculiar
action of the cohesive force is called capillary attraction or capillarity.
If a glass tube of extremely fine bore, such as a small
thermometer tube, be plunged into a cup of water or spirit of
wine, the liquid will immediately rise in the tube above the level
of that in the cup; and the surface of the little column thus
suspended will be a hollow hemisphere, whose diameter is the
interior diameter of the tube. If the same tube be plunged into
a cupful of mercury, the liquid will also rise in the tube, but it
will never attain the level of that in the cup, and its surface will
be a hemisphere whose diameter is also the diameter of the tube
(N. 172). The elevation or depression of the same liquid in
different tubes of the same matter is in the inverse ratio of their
internal diameters (N. 173), and altogether independent of their
thickness; whence it follows that the molecular action is insensible
at sensible distances, and that it is only the thinnest possible
film of the interior surface of the tubes that exerts a sensible
action on the liquid. So much indeed is this the case, that,
when tubes of the same bore are completely wetted with water
throughout their whole extent, mercury will rise to the same
height in all of them, whatever be their thickness or density,
because the minute coating of moisture is sufficient to remove
the internal column of mercury beyond the sphere of attraction
114of the tube, and to supply the place of a tube by its own capillary
attraction. The forces which produce the capillary phenomena
are the reciprocal attraction of the tube and the liquid, and of
the liquid particles on one another; and, in order that the capillary
column may be in equilibrio, the weight of that part of it
which rises above or sinks below the level of the liquid in the
cup must balance these forces.
The estimation of the action of the liquid is a difficult part of
this problem. La Place, Dr. Young, and other mathematicians,
have considered the liquid within the tube to be of uniform
density; but M. Poisson, in one of those masterly productions in
which he elucidates the most abstruse subjects, has proved that
the phenomena of capillary attraction depend upon a rapid
decrease in the density of the liquid column throughout an extremely
small space at its surface. Every indefinitely thin layer
of a liquid is compressed by the liquid above it, and supported
by that below. Its degree of condensation depends upon the
magnitude of the compressive force; and, as this force decreases
rapidly towards the surface, where it vanishes the density of the
liquid decreases also. M. Poisson has shown that, when this
force is omitted, the capillary surface becomes plane, and that
the liquid in the tube will neither rise above nor sink below the
level of that in the cup. In estimating the forces, it is also
necessary to include the variation in the density of the capillary
surface round the edges from the attraction of the tube.
The direction of the resulting force determines the curvature
of the surface of the capillary column. In order that a liquid
may be in equilibrio, the force resulting from all the forces acting
upon it must be perpendicular to the surface. Now it appears
that, as glass is more dense than water or alcohol, the resulting
force will be inclined towards the interior side of the tube; therefore
the surface of the liquid must be more elevated at the sides
of the tube than in the centre in order to be perpendicular to it,
so that it will be concave as in the thermometer. But, as glass
is less dense than mercury, the resulting force will be inclined
from the interior side of the tube (N. 174), so that the surface
of the capillary column must be more depressed at the sides of
the tube than in the centre, in order to be perpendicular to the
resulting force, and is consequently convex, as may be perceived
115in the mercury of the barometer when rising. The absorption of
moisture by sponges, sugar, salt, &c., are familiar examples of
capillary attraction. Indeed the pores of sugar are so minute,
that there seems to be no limit to the ascent of the liquid.
Wine is drawn up in a curve on the interior surface of a glass;
tea rises above its level on the side of a cup; but, if the glass
or cup be too full, the edges attract the liquid downwards, and
give it a rounded form. A column of liquid will rise above or
sink below its level between two plane parallel surfaces when
near to one another, according to the relative densities of the
plates and the liquid (N. 175); and the phenomena will be exactly
the same as in a cylindrical tube whose diameter is double
the distance of the plates from each other. If the two surfaces
be very near to one another, and touch each other at one of their
upright edges, the liquid will rise highest at the edges that are
in contact, and will gradually diminish in height as the surfaces
become more separated. The whole outline of the liquid column
will have the form of a hyperbola. Indeed, so universal is the
action of capillarity, that solids and liquids cannot touch one
another without producing a change in the form of the surface of
the liquid.
The attractions and repulsions arising from capillarity present
many curious phenomena. If two plates of glass or metal, both
of which are either dry or wet, be partly immersed in a liquid
parallel to one another, the liquid will be raised or depressed
close to their surfaces, but will maintain its level through the
rest of the space that separates them. At such a distance they
neither attract nor repel one another; but the instant they are
brought so near as to make the level part of the liquid disappear,
and the two curved parts of it meet, the two plates will rush
towards each other and remain pressed together (N. 176). If
one of the surfaces be wet and the other dry, they will repel one
another when so near as to have a curved surface of liquid
between them; but, if forced to approach a little nearer, the repulsion
will be overcome, and they will attract each other as if
they were both wet or both dry. Two balls of pith or wood
floating in water, or two balls of tin floating in mercury, attract
one another as soon as they are so near that the surface of the
liquid is curved between them. Two ships in the ocean may be
116brought into collision by this principle. But two balls, one of
which is wet and the other dry, repel one another as soon as the
liquid which separates them is curved at its surface. A bit of
tea-leaf is attracted by the edge of the cup if wet, and repelled
when dry, provided it be not too far from the edge and the cup
moderately full; if too full, the contrary takes place. It is
probable that the rise of the sap in vegetables is in some degree
owing to capillarity.</div></body></text></TEI>