<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="35">
335
SECTION XXXIV.

Magnetism a Dual Power—Antithetic Character of Paramagnetism and
Diamagnetism—The Earth Paramagnetic—Properties of Paramagnetic
Bodies—Polarity—Induction—Lines of Magnetic Force—Currents
of Electricity induced by them—Proved to be Closed Curves—Analogy
and Identity of Electricity and Magnetism—Terrestrial Magnetism—Mean
Values of the Three Magnetic Elements—Their Variations in
Double Progression proved to consist of Two Superposed Variations—Discovery
of the Periodicity of the Magnetic Storms—The Decennial
Period of the Magnetic Elements the same with that of the Solar Spots—Magnetism
of the Atmosphere—Diamagnetism—Action of Electro-Magnetism
on Paramagnetic, Diamagnetic Bodies, and on Copper, very
different—Proof of Diamagnetic Polarity and Induction—Magnecrystallic
Action—Effects of Compression, Heat, and Cleavage on Magnetic
Bodies—Mutual Dependence of Light, Heat, Electricity, &c. &c.—The
Conservation of Force and the Permanency of Matter Primary
Laws of Nature—Definition of Gravity not according to that Law—Gravity
only the Residual Force of a Universal Power—Magnetism of
the Ethereal Medium.
Magnetism may be regarded as a new science in consequence
of the profound researches and admirable discoveries of Dr. Faraday.
Since the magnetism of matter is only known by the
action of a magnet or of electricity upon it, by using an extremely
energetic magnet or electro-magnet he has proved that
all known substances, whether solid, liquid, or aëriform, are more
or less magnetic, but that the magnetism is very different in
different substances. For example, if a bar of iron be freely suspended
between the poles of a very powerful magnet or electro-magnet,
it will be attracted by both poles, and will set or rest
in the direction of a straight line joining them; but if a similar
bar of bismuth be freely suspended in the same manner, it will
rest in a direction at right angles to that which the iron bar
assumed. Thus the direction in which the iron sets is axial or
in the line of force, while that which the bismuth assumes is
equatorial or perpendicular to the line of force. Substances that
are magnetic after the manner of iron are said to be paramagnetic,
those that are magnetic after the manner of bismuth are
diamagnetic. As far as we know, all matter comes under one or
336other of these laws. Many bodies are paramagnetic besides iron,
as the loadstone, which consists of the peroxide and protoxide of
iron mixed with small portions of silica and alumina; also some
of the gems and metals, as cobalt, nickel, &c. A substance is
often paramagnetic if it contains only the 130,000th part of its
weight of iron; but by far the greater number are diamagnetic, as
all animal and vegetable matter, acids, oils, sugar, starch, bread,
&c., and all the gases except oxygen, which is highly paramagnetic;
and its force increases with its density: but notwithstanding
the predominance of diamagnetic matter at the surface, the
terrestrial globe is paramagnetic—in fact it is a powerful magnet.
Besides the substances which are paramagnetic naturally, that
property may be imparted by a variety of methods, as by friction
with magnets or even juxtaposition with them; and a bar of hard
steel held at the angle of the dip will become a magnet on receiving
a few strokes with a hammer on its upper end.
Polarity is one of the most distinguishing characters of magnetism:
it is the property which a magnet possesses when freely
suspended of resting spontaneously in the magnetic meridian, or
nearly north and south, and always returning to that position
when disturbed in consequence of the mean magnetic attraction
of the earth; yet the magnet has no tendency to move to the
north or south even when floating on water, because the same
pole that attracts one end repels the other. Both poles of a
magnet attract iron, which in return attracts either pole of the
magnet with an equal and contrary force. The action of a magnet
on unmagnetised iron is confined to attraction, whereas the reciprocal
agency of magnets is characterised by a repulsive as well as
by an attractive force; for a north pole repels a north pole, and a
south pole repels a south pole; but a north and south pole mutually
attract one another—which proves that paramagnetism is a
dual power in which the conservation of force is perfectly maintained,
for the force of attraction is exactly equal to the force of
repulsion. One kind of polarity cannot exist without the other:
they are absolutely simultaneous, dependent, and of equal intensity.
Induction is the power which a magnet possesses of exciting
temporary or permanent paramagnetism in such bodies in its
vicinity as are capable of receiving it. By this property the
mere approach of a magnet renders iron and steel paramagnetic,
337the more powerfully the less the distance, but the induced force
is always exactly equal to the force which produces it. When
the north end of a magnet is brought near to, and in the line
with, an unmagnetised iron bar, the bar acquires all the properties
of a perfect magnet; the end next the north pole of the
magnet becomes a south pole, while the remote end becomes a
north pole. Exactly the reverse takes place when the south end
is presented to the bar, so that each pole of a magnet induces the
opposite polarity in the adjacent end of the bar, and the same
polarity in the remote extremity; consequently the nearest extremity
of the bar is attracted, and the farther repelled; but as
the action is greater on the adjacent than on the distant part, the
resulting force is that of attraction. By induction the iron bar
not only acquires polarity, but the power of inducing paramagnetism
in a third body; and although all these properties vanish
from the iron as soon as the magnet is removed, a lasting increase
of intensity is generally imparted to the magnet itself by the reaction
of the temporary paramagnetism of the iron. Iron acquires
the inductive force more rapidly than steel, yet it loses it as
quickly on the removal of the magnet, whereas the steel is impressed
with a lasting polarity.
A certain time is requisite for induction, and it may be accelerated
by anything that excites a vibratory motion in the particles
of the steel; such as the smart stroke of a hammer, or heat succeeded
by sudden cold. A steel bar may be converted into a
magnet by the transmission of an electric discharge through it;
and as its efficacy is the same in whatever direction the electricity
passes, the effect arises from its mechanical operation exciting
a vibration among the particles of the steel. It has been
observed that the particles of iron easily resume their neutral
state after induction, while those of steel resist the restoration of
equilibrium, or a return to the neutral state: it is therefore evident
that any cause which removes or diminishes the resistance
of the particles will tend to destroy the paramagnetism of the
steel; consequently the same mechanical means which develop
the power will also destroy it. On that account a steel bar may
lose its paramagnetism by any mechanical concussion, such as by
falling on a hard substance, a blow with a hammer, and heating
to redness, which makes the steel soft. The circumstances which
determine whether it shall gain or lose are its position with
338respect to the magnetic equator, and the higher or lower intensity
of its previous magnetic state.
A comparison of the number of vibrations accomplished by the
same magnetised needle during the same time at different distances
from a magnet gives the law of paramagnetic intensity,
which follows the inverse ratio of the square of the distance—a
law that is not affected by the intervention of any substance
whatever between the magnet and the needle, provided the substance
be not itself susceptible of magnetism. Induction and the
reciprocal action of magnets are therefore subject to the laws of
mechanics; but the composition and resolution of the forces are
complicated in consequence of four forces being constantly in activity,
two in each magnet. Mr. Were Fox discovered that the
law of the paramagnetic force changes from the inverse square of
the distance to the simple inverse ratio when the distance between
two magnets is as small as from the fourth to the eighth of an
inch, or even as much as half an inch when the magnets are
large; and in the case of repulsion, that the change takes place
at a still greater distance, especially when the two magnets differ
materially in intensity.
Without assuming any hypothesis of what magnetism is, or how
that force is originated or sustained, Dr. Faraday regards a
magnet as a source of power surrounded by curved lines of force
which are not only representants of the magnetic power in
quality and direction, but also in quantity—an hypothesis which
accords perfectly with experiment, and with the action both of
electricity and magnetism. The nature and form of these lines
may be seen by placing a bar magnet upon a table, spreading a
sheet of stiff paper over it so as to be perfectly level and free
from creases, and then sifting very clean iron filings through
a fine sieve equably over it. The filings will instantly assume
the form of the curved lines represented by fig. 1, plate 7, in
consequence of the action of the magnet. These lines are the
true representatives of the magnetic forces, and being related to
a polar power, they have opposite qualities in opposite directions.
When a magnet is broken across the middle, each part is at once
converted into a perfect magnet; the part that originally had a
south pole acquires a north pole at the fractured end; the part
that had originally a north pole gets a south pole; and as far as
mechanical division can be carried, it is found that each fragment
339is a perfect magnet. Fig. 2, plate 7, shows the lines of force in
a fractured magnet when the ends are not yet separated; fig. 3
shows them when they are.
Currents of electricity are produced in conducting bodies moved
across these lines of magnetic force. If a copper wire at a little
distance above the north pole of a bar magnet be moved from
left to right, at any angle across the lines of magnetic force, they
will induce a current of electricity in the wire flowing from
right to left; if the wire be moved with the same velocity in the
contrary direction, the induced current will be of equal intensity,
but it will flow from left to right. Similar results are obtained
from the south pole, and the phenomena are the same when the
magnet is moved and the wire is at rest; in both cases the
intensity is greater the swifter the motion. It appears that the
quantity of electricity induced is directly as the amount of the
magnetic curves intersected, and when a wire is moving uniformly
in a field of equal magnetic force, the current of electricity
generated is proportional to the time, and also to the velocity of
motion; for when a metallic disc is made to revolve through the
lines of force, the current induced is strongest near the edge where
the velocity is greatest; and in different substances moving across
the lines of force the intensity of the induced current is directly
as the conducting power of the substance. Thus bodies moved
near a magnet have an electrical current developed in them, and
conversely bodies affected by an electric current are definitely
moved by a magnet near them.
By the preceding experiments it appears that magnetic polarity
is manifested in two ways; in the magnetised needle, by attraction
and repulsion, and in a wire moving across lines of magnetic
force it is shown by the opposite directions in which the induced
current flows according as the body is moved from the right to
the left, or left to right. Hence polarity consists in the opposite
and antithetical actions manifested at the opposite ends or opposite
sides of a limited or unlimited line of force. Antithesis is
the true and most general character of magnetism, whatever may
be its mode of action.
It was by the induction of electric currents in copper wires
moving across the lines of magnetic force that Dr. Faraday
proved that the lines of force issuing from a magnet are closed
curves which return again and pass through the interior of the
340magnet. He placed two bar magnets of the same length, size,
and intensity with their similar poles together, so that they might
act as one magnet. A copper wire was then passed between
their axes, which after extending through half their length was
bent up equatorially and turned back along the outside, so that
the whole wire formed a loop, the two ends being connected with
a galvanometer. When the whole wire was made to revolve, no
effect was produced, although it crossed the lines of magnetic
force; but when it was cut in two, so as to separate the external
from the internal part, electrical currents of equal intensity, but
in contrary directions, were induced in each portion of the wire as
they were made separately to cross the lines of force, for the
apparatus was so constructed that that could be done. The exterior
wire crossed the lines of force which issued from the
magnets at right angles to their axes, while the equatorial part
of the interior wire traversed the returning lines of force. It is
evident that these forces neutralized each other when the whole
wire revolved: consequently the internal and external lines of
force must have been of equal intensity and opposite in direction,
so as to balance one another. By this and a very great number
of other experiments Dr. Faraday has proved that the magnetic
lines of force are continuous closed curves alike in shape, size,
and power. They extend indefinitely beyond the magnet, and
undergo no change by distance.
Thus the magnetic force pervades the interior of the mass; if
electricity does the same, a compensation must either take place,
or it also must move in lines of force, sensible only at the surface.
Electricity has a perpetual tendency to escape, and does
escape, when not prevented by the coercive power of the air, and
other non-conducting substances. Such a tendency does not
exist in magnetism, which never leaves the substance containing
it under any circumstances whatever. There must be some
coercive force, analogous to friction, which arrests the magnetic
forces, so as first to oppose their separation, and then to prevent
their reunion. In soft iron the coercive force is either wanting
or extremely feeble, since iron is easily rendered paramagnetic by
induction, and as easily loses that quality; whereas in steel the
coercive force is extremely energetic, because it prevents the steel
from acquiring the paramagnetic properties rapidly, and entirely
hinders it from losing them when acquired. The feebleness of
341the coercive force in iron, and its energy in steel, with regard to
the paramagnetic force, is perfectly analogous to the facility of
transmission afforded to electricity by non-electrics, and the
resistance it experiences in electrics. At every step the analogy
between electricity and magnetism becomes more striking. The
agency of attraction and repulsion is common to both; the positive
and negative electricities are similar to the northern and
southern polarities, and are governed by the same laws—namely,
that between like powers there is repulsion, and between unlike
powers there is attraction. Each of these four forces is capable
of acting most energetically when alone; but as the electric
equilibrium is restored by the union of the two electric states,
and magnetic neutrality by the combination of the two polarities,
they respectively neutralise each other when joined. All these
forces vary inversely as the square of the distance, and consequently
come under the same mechanical laws.
A like analogy extends to magnetic and electric induction.
Iron and steel are in a state of equilibrium when neutral; but
this equilibrium is immediately disturbed on the approach of the
pole of a magnet, which by induction transfers one kind of
polarity to one end of an iron or steel bar, and the opposite kind
to the other—effects exactly similar to electrical induction.
There is even a correspondence between the fracture of a magnet
and that of an electric conductor; for if an oblong conductor be
electrified by induction, its two extremities will have opposite
electricities; and if in that state it be divided across the middle,
the two portions, when removed to a distance from one another,
will each retain the electricity that has been induced upon it.
The analogy, however, does not extend to transference. A body
may transfer a redundant quantity of positive electricity to
another, or deprive another of its electricity—the one gaining at
the expense of the other; but a body cannot possess only one
kind of polarity. With that exception, there is such perfect correspondence
between the theories of magnetic attractions and
repulsions, and electric forces in conducting bodies, that they not
only are the same in principle, but are determined by the same
formulæ. Experiment concurs with theory in proving the
identity of these two influences. Hence, if the electrical phenomena
be due to a modification of the ethereal medium, the magnetic
phenomena must be owing to an analogous cause.
Curved lines of magnetic force issue from every point of the
342earth’s surface where there is sensible dip, and bending round
enter the earth again at the magnetic equator. They induce
electric currents in conducting-wires, moving across them exactly
the same as in artificial magnets; and when a hollow helix, or
coil of copper wire, whose extremities are connected with a galvanometer,
is placed in the magnetic dip, and suddenly moved
across the lines of force, the needle of the galvanometer will
vibrate through an arc of 80° or 90°, in consequence of the
electric current induced by these lines of magnetic force in the
wire, and the action is greater when a core of soft iron is placed
in the helix, which becomes a temporary magnet by induction.
Again, if a copper plate be connected with a galvanometer by two
copper wires, one from the centre, and another from the circumference,
in order to collect and convey the electricity, it is
found that, when the plate is made to revolve in a plane passing
through the line of the dip, the galvanometer is not affected.
But as soon as the plate is inclined to that plane, electricity
begins to be developed by its motion across the lines of magnetic
force; it becomes more powerful as the inclination increases, and
arrives at a maximum when the plate revolves at right angles to
the line of dip. When the revolution is in the same direction
with that of the hands of a watch, the current of electricity flows
from its centre to the circumference; and when the rotation is
in a contrary direction, the current sets the opposite way. Thus
a copper plate, revolving at right angles to the line of the dip,
becomes a new electrical machine, differing from the common
plate-glass machine by the copper being the most perfect conductor,
whereas glass is the most perfect non-conductor; besides
insulation, which is essential to the glass machine, is fatal to the
copper one. The quantity of electricity evolved by the metal
does not appear to be inferior to that devolved by the glass,
though very different in intensity. Even a ship crossing the
lines of force must have electric currents running through her.
Dr. Faraday observes that such is the facility with which electricity
is generated by the magnetic lines of force, that scarcely
any piece of metal can be moved without a development of it;
consequently, among the arrangements of steam-engines and
metallic machinery, curious electro-magnetic combinations probably
exist which have never yet been noticed. Thus magnetic
lines of force certainly issue from the surface of the globe.
No doubt the earth is a magnet on a vast scale, but it differs
343from all others in having four poles of maximum magnetic force
of different intensities, the two in the northern hemisphere
having a secular motion in a contrary direction from the two in
the southern. They are not even symmetrically placed; hence
the magnetic intensity varies so much in the different points on
the earth’s surface, that the dynamic equator, or line passing
through all the points of least intensity, is a very irregular curve
surrounding the globe, but by no means coinciding with the terrestrial
equator. In consequence of the mean action of these
four forces, the north end of a magnetised needle, arranged so as
to revolve in a vertical plane, dips or inclines beneath the
horizon in the northern hemisphere, and the south end in the
southern. The two hemispheres are separated by a line encircling
the earth, called the magnetic equator, or line of no dip,
in which the dipping or inclination needle is horizontal. On
each side of this line the inclination increases till at last the
needle becomes perpendicular to the horizon in two points, or
rather small spaces, in each hemisphere, known as the magnetic
poles, which are quite different from the poles of the earth’s
rotation. The mean action of the four poles of magnetic intensity
causes the mariner’s compass, or a magnetic needle suspended
so as to revolve in a horizontal plane, to remain at rest when
pointing to the two magnetic poles. It is then in the magnetic
meridian of the place of observation, which is thus determined
by the mean action of all the four magnetic forces.
These mean values of the three magnetic elements, namely,
the declination, inclination or dip, and magnetic intensity, are
well known to be subject to secular, annual, and diurnal variations.
The secular only become sensible after some years, but
the annual and diurnal variations have a double progression—that
is to say, two maximum and two minimum values in
their respective periods of a year and twenty-four hours; for
example, the declination needle makes two deviations to the west
and two to the east in the course of twenty-four hours, and that
with great regularity. Now General Sabine discovered that the
double progression arises from two combined or superposed variations
having different hours of maxima and minima, and that
they are due to two distinctly different causes—the one being
the difference in the sun’s position relatively to the place of
observation at the different seasons of the year, and hours of the
344day and night; the other being a mean annual and diurnal
variation proved by General Sabine to exist in those great magnetic
storms or casual disturbances which affect the magnetic
elements simultaneously over enormously extensive tracts of the
globe.
Moreover the General discovered that, besides these annual
and diurnal variations, the magnetic storms have a variation
which accomplishes its vicissitudes in ten or more nearly eleven
years, the increase from year to year being gradual, till its
maximum becomes twice as great as its minimum value. In
consequence of this inequality in the storms or casual disturbances,
each of the magnetic elements has a variation of similar
period and similar maxima and minima. Now the number and
magnitude of the spots on the sun had been observed by M.
Schwabe, of Dessau, to increase to a maximum, and decrease
again to a minimum, regularly in the very same period of between
ten and eleven years; and General Sabine found that this
variation in the solar spots, and that in the magnetic elements,
not only have the same periods of maxima and minima, but
that they correspond in all their minutest vicissitudes. Thus a
very remarkable and unexpected connexion exists between terrestrial
and solar magnetism. The dual and antagonist principle
is perfectly maintained in the earth’s magnetism, all the phenomena
and their variations being in opposite directions in the
two hemispheres. (N. 226.)
No doubt the magnetic lines of force in the earth are closed
curves, as in artificial magnets; but in their circuitous courses
they may extend to any distance in space, or rather in the
ethereal medium, even to thousands or tens of thousands of
miles; for the ethereal medium is permeable to lines of magnetic
force, or rather transmits them, otherwise the solar spots could
not affect the variations of terrestrial magnetism; besides, they
pass through the Torricellian vacuum, which is nearly a void
with respect to air, but not to the ethereal medium.
The atmosphere which surrounds the earth to the height of
about fifty miles with sensible density, consists of three and a
half parts by weight of nitrogen gas and one part of oxygen,
uniformly mixed. The nitrogen is neutral whether dense or
rare, hot or cold, while the oxygen is highly paramagnetic; but
it loses a great part of its force when rarefied by heat; consequently
345the magnetic force of the atmosphere must increase from
the equator to the poles of maximum cold; it must vary summer
and winter, night and day. Its effect upon terrestrial magnetism
is unknown; but it can hardly be without some influence. M.
E. Becquerel observes—“If we reflect that the earth is encompassed
by a mass of air equivalent in weight to a layer of mercury
of 30 inches, we may inquire whether such a mass of
magnetic gas, continually agitated, and submitted to the regular
and irregular variations of pressure and temperature, does not
intervene in some of the phenomena dependent upon terrestrial
magnetism. If we calculate, in fact, what is the magnetic force
of this fluid mass, we find that it is equivalent to an immense
plate of iron, of a thickness little more than
1⁄250
of an inch,
which covers the whole surface of the globe.” Both the
conducting power of the air and its density are increased
by cold; and as the sum of the magnetic forces which issue
from the earth on one side of the line of no dip is equal to their
sum on the other side, the intensity and concentration in our
winter are coincident with a diffusion and feebleness in the opposite
hemisphere, so that the line of no dip will move annually
from north to south and back again. The same holds with
regard to day and night. Thus the law of the conservation of
force is rigorously maintained; and it is equally so in the effect
of the atmosphere on the magnetic lines of force, which refracts
them as they pass through it, in one direction in summer, and in
the opposite direction in winter—in one direction in the enlightened
hemisphere, in the other in that which is dark. The whole
of the magnetic lines about the earth are held by their mutual
tension in one connected, sensitive system, which feels in every
part, even to the antipodes, a change in any particular place.
It may be mentioned as a well-known fact, that apparent
anomalies have been found in the diurnal variation of the declination
in the high magnetic latitudes of the northern hemisphere
when compared with their great regularity in other parts of the
same hemisphere, and that the magnetic storms are of much
greater magnitude there than in lower latitudes. Moreover,
although Captain Maguire’s observations at Cape Barrow, in
the North Polar Ocean, show that the annual and diurnal variations
of the casual disturbances or magnetic storms, as well as
those of the decennial period, are maintained, yet it appears that
346at certain hours of the day the disturbance in the declination
may be easterly at Point Barrow, and westerly at the Magnetic
Observatory at Toronto, in Upper Canada, and vice versâ: in fact,
the magnetic storms are simultaneous at these two stations, but
in opposite directions—a circumstance not yet accounted for, and
may possibly be due to the increased magnetism of the air in
these cold regions. The heat of the sun has no effect upon
terrestrial magnetism unless possibly by its indirect action on the
oxygen of the atmosphere; but hitherto it has been imperceptible.
It is hardly possible that the aurora can be independent
of the magnetic character of the air, since it occurs in the high
latitudes, where the atmospheric magnetism is most powerful.
Captain Maguire remarked that it frequently appeared at Point
Barrow when the magnetic storms were at a maximum.
We are totally ignorant of the cause of terrestrial magnetism,
though the powerful influence of the solar spots renders it highly
probable that it will ultimately be found to originate in the sun
himself. Mr. Barlow’s theory of electric currents revolving round
the globe is borne out by Mr. Fox’s observations in the Cornish
mines, which show that electro-magnetism is extremely active in
metallic veins; that not only the nature of the metalliferous
deposits must have been determined by their relative electrical
conditions, but that the direction of the metallic veins must have
been influenced by the direction of the magnetic meridians, and
in fact almost all the metallic deposits in the world tend from
east to west, or from north-east to south-west. However, these
currents of electricity may be regarded as magnetic lines of force,
and are more likely to be the effect than the cause of terrestrial
magnetism. They are found to have a powerful inductive effect
on the Atlantic telegraph, disturbing the needles and galvanometers
at each end of the line to a considerable degree, and on
the night of the 6th of September, 1858, a magnetic storm passed
over the cable, which violently agitated the reflecting galvanometer
in connection with the telegraphic wires.
We are equally ignorant of the cause of the secular magnetic
variations, but we have no reason to believe that the earth is
alone magnetic; on the contrary, the planets are probably
magnets, and we know that the sun and moon are magnetic;
hence, as the magnetic, like the gravitating force, is transmitted
through the ethereal medium, the induction of the sun, moon,
347and planets, in all their secular and periodic changes, may cause
perpetual variations in terrestrial magnetism, and it may not be
beyond the delicacy of modern observation to ascertain whether
a planet, when nearest to the earth, has any sensible magnetism.
Diamagnetism is also a dual power, but in complete antithesis
to paramagnetism under the same circumstances. Dr. Faraday
first discovered this property in heavy glass, or silico-borate of
lead, a piece of which was repelled by the pole of a powerful
electro-magnet, and an elongated prism of the same heavy glass,
when freely suspended between the poles, set equatorially. He
then found that so great a number of substances followed the
same law, that it established the very remarkable fact of a
hitherto unknown force having acted upon the substances submitted
to its influence, a discovery which he subsequently confirmed
by many experiments, all of which proved the antithesis
between the two modes of magnetic action. He also discovered
that magnetic bodies differ exceedingly in their magnetic power:
of paramagnetic bodies iron is the most powerful; then follow
nickel, cobalt, and a long gradation down to osmium and a
vacuum. The body that seems to have the lowest diamagnetic
power is arsenic, and the series ascends to heavy glass, antimony,
phosphorus, and bismuth; so iron and bismuth are the most
powerful in their respective classes, and both have a small conducting
power for electricity. It may be presumed that many
remarkable instances of diamagnetism are to be met with in
nature; among others, Dr. Faraday has suggested the idea that
Saturn’s ring, from its position, may be diamagnetic with regard
to the planet.
With very powerful magnets or electro-magnets, which are
absolutely necessary for all these experiments, it is found that no
simple substance is neutral, but that such may be compounded
by mixing in due proportion a diamagnetic and paramagnetic
liquid, as water and protosulphate of iron.
Professor Tyndall proved diamagnetic polarity by placing two
bismuth bars within two vertical coils or spirals of insulated
copper wire, through which electric currents were transmitted
from a galvanic battery, and caused to act upon a steel magnet
freely suspended without the spirals. Now, when the excited
magnetism is merely by induction, the electric current, being
momentary, only causes a shock or momentary deviation in the
348magnet, which returns to its original position when the current
ceases. When, on the contrary, the magnetism is permanent,
the suspended magnet does not return to its original position
when the current ceases. In Professor Tyndall’s experiment the
deviation was permanent, and it was equally so when a bismuth
bar was freely suspended and the cores within the spirals were
steel magnets. Had the effect been from currents induced in the
mass of the bar of bismuth, division of the bar would have stopped
them, but the result was the same with powdered bismuth as
with the solid mass. Moreover, since the strength of induced
currents depends upon the conducting power of the substance,
and as the conducting power of copper is forty times as great as
that of bismuth, had the polarity been induced and not real, the
effect ought to have been forty times greater when copper instead
of bismuth cores were put in the spirals, whereas it was scarcely
sensible. Besides these proofs, Dr. Tyndall made experiments
with eleven different diamagnetic substances, of which water was
one, with similar results. He then determined the polarity of
twelve paramagnetic bodies by the same method, whence it
appeared that the same action which produced a north pole in
the paramagnetic bodies produced a south pole in those that
were diamagnetic, and vice versâ, whence he concludes that diamagnetic
polarity is one of the most firmly established truths of
science. It follows from this that, when a man is standing, his
head is a north pole and his feet a south, and the top of an iron
railing on which he may be leaning is a south pole and the lower
end a north. Diamagnetic bodies thus possess a polarity, the
same in kind but opposite in direction to that possessed by paramagnetic
ones.[18] They are both dual powers, and the two diamagnetic
forces like the two paramagnetic being coexistent,
simultaneous, and mutually dependent, there can be no doubt
that the diamagnetic forces also are represented, or rather consist
of curved and closed lines of force passing through the interior
of the substance. Dr. Tyndall has proved that the attraction
of iron, and the repulsion of bismuth, are as the square of the
electro-magnetic current producing them, and that diamagnetic
substances are capable of induction.
349The molecular structure of substances freely suspended between
the poles of a magnet has a decided effect upon the position they
assume.
It has already been mentioned that the optic axis is a symmetrical
line in a doubly refracting crystal in which there is no
double refraction, and that in some crystals there are two such
symmetrical lines. Now, Professor Plücker of Bonn discovered,
when such crystals are submitted to powerful magnetic influence,
that the single optic axis in the one, and the resultant or mean
line between the double optic axes in the other, set diametrically
or at right angles to the line of magnetic force; and so powerful
did the Professor find the action of magnetism on crystalline
form, that the mineral cyanite, when suspended, arranges itself
so definitely with regard to terrestrial magnetism, that it might
be used as a compass needle.
Dr. Faraday afterwards observed that amorphous substances,
cut in the form of a sphere, have no tendency to set or be
attracted or repelled in one direction in preference to any other;
but if the sphere be formed of a crystallized substance, it is a
general fact that, whether it be paramagnetic or diamagnetic, it
is more powerfully attracted or repelled in one direction than in
any other—a property named by Dr. Faraday magnecrystallic
action. For example, a sphere of calcareous spar, which is a
diamagnetic crystal, is most strongly repelled in the direction of
its principal optic axis, and least strongly in the direction of its
least axis. In a sphere of carbonate of iron, which has exactly
the same crystalline form and is highly paramagnetic, the line
which in carbonate of lime sets equatorially, in this case sets
axially, and more strongly in that direction than in any other.
The law according to which the attraction of the carbonate of iron
increases from the least to its greatest or principal optic axis, is
precisely the same as that according to which the repulsion of the
calcareous spar increases from the least to the principal optic axis.
These relations are not altered by the immersion of the spheres
in liquids of either magnetism. Dr. Faraday observed that a
line at right angles to the planes of principal cleavage in crystals
takes the axial position, and on that account he called it the
magnecrystallic axis. Its position was proved by MM. Tyndall
and Knoblauch to depend upon the general fact, that the mass is
most strongly repelled in the direction of the planes of principal
350cleavage, and that the elective position of crystals depends more
upon the direction of these planes with respect to the electric
force, than upon the optic axis. The planes of principal cleavage
set themselves equatorially in diamagnetic, and axially in paramagnetic
substances: it was thence inferred that the phenomena
offered by crystals in the magnetic field is a particular case of the
general law, that the superior action of magnets upon matter in
a particular direction is due to the particles of the body being
closer together in that direction than in any other: in short,
the line of maximum density; the force exerted being attractive
or repulsive according as the particles are paramagnetic or diamagnetic.
It appears, however, that the set of crystals with regard to the
line of magnetic force does not depend solely upon their density
in particular directions. Professor Matteucci, of Pisa, has proved
that the diamagnetic force is inversely as the conducting power
of substances for electricity, that the conducting power is a
maximum in the planes of principal cleavage, and that a needle
of crystallized bismuth, in which the planes of cleavage are
parallel to its length, places itself equatorially with more force
when these planes are vertical, or at right angles to the force,
than when they are horizontal or parallel to it. Experiments had
hitherto been made only with diamagnetic or slightly paramagnetic
bodies, which induced M. le Roux to try the effect of magnetism
on pulverized iron compressed by the hydraulic press,
which reduced the grains of iron to lamellæ equivalent to planes
of cleavage. Cubes of this substance, suspended by a thread over
a horseshoe magnet, oscillated for a longer time when the lamellæ
were perpendicular than when they were horizontal; that is, the
force was stronger when the lamellæ were equatorial than when
they were axial, exactly the same result as in Professor Matteucci’s
experiment with the needle of bismuth. Thus the vertical
position of the cleavages, which increases the diamagnetism
of the bismuth, increases also the paramagnetism of the iron.
M. le Roux observes that these results are independent of the
influence of the currents of electricity induced in the oscillating
body, for the fundamental character of the phenomena of Arago’s
discovery of rotation by induction is, that the oscillations diminish
rapidly in extent without any sensible diminution in their duration,
while in his experiments the time of the oscillations varied.
351He concludes that the arrangement of the molecules must be intimately
connected with paramagnetism or diamagnetism itself,
since the effect of that arrangement is equally sensible in bismuth
and iron, although the diamagnetism of the former is 25,000
times weaker than the paramagnetism of the latter.
The diamagnetism of conducting substances and metals, such as
gold, silver, and copper, is augmented by division. Compression
has also a great effect on magnetic action. For example, a bar
of soft iron sets with its longest dimensions from pole to pole of
a magnet, but a bar of compressed carbonate of iron-dust, whose
shortest dimensions coincide with the line of pressure, sets
equatorially. A bar of bismuth whose plane of principal cleavage
is parallel to its length sets equatorially, but a bar of compressed
bismuth dust, whose shortest dimensions coincide with the line
of pressure, or a bar of bismuth whose principal planes of cleavage
are transverse to its length, sets with its length axially. The
antithesis is perfect whether the bars are under the influence of
a magnet or electro-magnet. For since the diamagnetic force is
inversely as the conducting power of a body for electricity, and
that the latter is a maximum in the direction of the planes of
principal cleavage, therefore when these planes are parallel to
the axis of the bismuth bar it sets equatorially; but as the conducting
power is augmented when the bismuth dust is compressed
in the direction of the force, the diamagnetic power is
diminished, and the bar sets axially. Again, since the paramagnetic
force augments with the conducting power, the action
of the magnet on the iron is antithetic to that on the bismuth.
The action of an electro-magnet on copper is strongly contrasted
with that which it exerts on iron or bismuth. For when
a copper bar suspended by a thread revolves before its pole, it is
brought to a dead halt as soon as the electric current acts upon it,
and maintains its position with considerable tenacity, for it does
not return when pushed out of it, but keeps its new place with
stiffness; however, as soon as the electric current ceases, there is
a strong revulsion, the bar revolving the contrary way. Even
when swinging with considerable force it may be caught and
retained in any position at pleasure, but there is no revulsion
when it is arrested either in the axial or equatorial position; at
any angle between these two, but especially midway, the electricity
will make it move towards the axis, but it is arrested
352before it comes to it. The action depends much on the form
and dimensions of the bar and the magnetic pole, which ought
to be flat. The phenomena are due to the high electro-conducting
power of the copper, and are met with in some of the
other pure metals, though in a far inferior degree.
Great magnetic power is requisite for all these experiments.
Dr. Faraday employed a magnet that could sustain a weight of
450 lbs. at each pole, and the poles were either pointed or flat
surfaces at pleasure, as the kind of experiment required.
Heat strongly affects the magnetic properties of bodies. Dr.
Faraday found that, when the temperature of nickel is increased,
its magnetic force diminishes; when that of iron is increased its
magnetic force remains the same, while that of cobalt increases;
which seems to indicate that there is a temperature at which the
magnetic force is a maximum, above and below which it diminishes.
Nickel loses its magnetism at the temperature of
boiling oil, iron at a red heat, and cobalt near the temperature at
which copper melts. Calcareous spar retains its magnetic character
at a very high temperature; but the same substance when
it contains iron, and also oxide of iron, loses it entirely at a dull
red heat. A crystal of the ferrocarbonate of lime was absolutely
reversed by change of temperature, for at a low heat the optic
axis pointed axially, and at a high temperature equatorially.
With the exception of these substances, magnecrystals, whether
paramagnetic or diamagnetic, are generally all affected alike by
heat. The difference between the forces in any two different
directions, as for instance the greatest and least principal axes,
diminishes as the temperature is raised, increases as the temperature
is lowered, and is constant for a given temperature. No
unmixed or pure substance has as yet passed by heat from the
paramagnetic to the diamagnetic state. No simple magnecrystal
has shown any inversion of this kind, nor have any of the chief
axes of power changed their characters or relations to one
another.
It appears that, as the molecules of crystals and compressed
bodies affect magnetism, so magnetism acts upon the molecules of
matter, for torsion diminishes the magnetic force, and the elasticity
of iron and steel is altered by magnetism. M. Matteucci has
found that the mechanical compression of glass alters the rotatory
power of a polarized ray of light transmitted through it, and that
353a change takes place in the temper of glass under the influence of
powerful magnetism.
Even from the limited view of the powers of nature which precedes,
it is evident that the progress of science based upon experiment
tends to show that the various forces of light, heat, motion,
chemical affinity, electricity, and magnetism will ultimately be
traced to one common origin; that they are so directly related, and
mutually dependent, that they are convertible, motion producing
heat, and heat motion; chemical affinity producing electricity,
and electricity chemical action, &c., each mediately or immediately
producing the other. These forces are transmitted through
substances; they act upon matter, causing changes in the molecular
structure of bodies either momentary or permanent, and
reciprocally the changes indicate the action of these forces. Matter
and force are only known to us as manifestations of Almighty
power: we are assured that we can neither create nor destroy
them—that their amount is the same now as in the beginning.
In chemical attraction the powers with which a molecule of
matter is endowed, and which give rise to various qualities,
never change; even when passing through a thousand combinations,
the molecule and its power are ever the same.
Machinery does not create force; it only enables us to turn the
forces of nature to the best advantage; it is by the force of wind
or falling water that our corn is ground, and the steam engine
owes its power to the force of heat and chemical action. As
force cannot be created, neither can it be annihilated. It may
be dispersed in various directions, and subdivided so as to become
evanescent to our perceptions; it may be balanced so as
to be in abeyance, or become potential as in static electricity; but
the instant the impediment is removed the force is manifested by
motion; it may also be turned into heat by friction, but it is
never lost. Every motion we make, every breath, every word we
utter, is a force that produces pulsations which are communicated
to continually increasing particles of air, and conveyed through
countless channels so as to become indeed imperceptible to our
senses, yet they are demonstrated to exist as witnesses of the
words we have spoken or the actions we have performed, by
analysis, that all-powerful instrument of human reason.[19]
354A body acquires heat in the exact proportion that the adjacent
substances become cold, and when heat is absorbed by a body it
becomes an expansive force at the expense of those around that
contract, but it is not lost. In chemical action at a distance the
principle of the conservation of force is maintained, for a chemical
action may be produced miles away from an electro-magnet, perfectly
equivalent to the dominant chemical action in the battery.
The two electricities are developed in equal proportions, which
may be combined so as to produce many changes in their respective
relations, yet the sum of the force of one kind can never be
made in the smallest degree either to exceed or to come short of
the sum of the other. Experimental research proves that the conservation
of force is an unalterable law of nature—“a principle
in physics as large and sure as that of the indestructibility of
matter or the invariability of gravity. No hypothesis should be
admitted, nor any assertion of a fact credited, that denies this
principle. No view should be inconsistent or incompatible with
it. Many of our hypotheses in the present state of science may
not comprehend it, and may be unable to suggest its consequences,
but none should oppose or contradict it.”
Having thus expressed his conviction of the truth of this great
principle, Dr. Faraday considers the case of gravity, and concludes
that “the definition of gravity as an attractive force between
the particles of matter varying inversely as the square of
the distance, while it stands as a full definition of the power, is
inconsistent with the principle of the conservation of force.”
For while in this definition the principle is maintained of the
constancy of the force at the same distance, it implies a creation
of force to an enormous amount when the distance is diminished,
and an equal amount annihilated when the distance is increased,—“an
effect,” he says, “which is equal in its infinity and its
consequences with creation, and only within the power of Him
who creates.” He continues, “It will not be imagined for a
moment that I am opposed to what may be called the law of
gravitating action, that is, the law by which all the known
effects of gravity are governed; what I am considering is the
definition of the force of gravitation. That the result of one
exercise of a power may be inversely as the square of the distance,
I believe and admit; and I know that it is so in the case
of gravity, and has been verified to an extent that could hardly
355have been within the conception of Newton himself when he
gave utterance to the law; but that the totality of a force can
be employed according to that law I do not believe either in
relation to gravitation, or electricity, or magnetism, or any other
supposed form of power. That there should be a power of
gravitation existing by itself, having no relation to the other
natural powers, and no respect to the law of the conservation of
force, is as little likely as that there should be a principle of
levity as well as gravity. Gravity may be only the residual part
of the other forces of nature, as Mossotti has tried to show; but
that it should fall out from the law of all other forces, and should
be outside the reach either of farther experiment or philosophical
conclusions, is not probable. So we must strive to learn more of
this outstanding power, and endeavour to avoid any definition
of it which is incompatible with the principles of force generally,
for all the phenomena of nature lead us to believe that the great
and governing law is one. Thus gravitation can only be considered
as part of a more general force whose law has yet to be
discovered.”
The definition of the gravitating force immediately suggests
the question of how it is transmitted; the full force of that
question was felt by Newton himself when, in his third letter to
Bentley, he wrote, “That gravity should be innate, inherent,
and essential to matter, so that one body may act upon another
at a distance, through a vacuum, without the mediation of anything
else by and through which their action and force may be
conveyed from one to another, is to me so great an absurdity
that I believe no man who has in philosophic matters a competent
faculty of thinking can ever fall into it. Gravity must be caused
by an agent, acting constantly according to certain laws; but
whether this agent be material or immaterial I have left to the
consideration of my readers.”
Since Newton’s time the continual decrease in the periodic
times of the comets belonging to our system, and the undulatory
theory of light and heat, have proved the existence of an extremely
rare elastic medium filling space even to the most distant regions
of which we are cognizant. But, rare as it may be, it has inertia
enough to resist the motion of comets, and therefore must be
material, whether considered to be ether or, according to Mr.
Grove, the highly attenuated atmospheres of the celestial bodies.
356Professor William Thomson of Glasgow has computed that in the
space traversed by the earth in its annual revolution, a cube
whose side is 1000 miles would contain not less than a pound
weight of the ethereal medium, and that the earth, in moving
through it, would not displace the ·250th part of that pound of
matter. Yet that is enormously more dense than the continuation
of the earth’s atmosphere would be in interplanetary
space, if rarefied according to Bayle’s law. But whatever be
the density or nature of the ether, there is every reason to believe
that it is the medium which transmits the gravitating force
from one celestial object to another, or possibly it may possess
a higher attribute with regard to gravity than its mere transmission.
Dr. Faraday, who discovered the magnetism of the atmosphere,
is led to believe that the ethereal medium too is magnetic by the
following experiment. Three solutions of the protosulphate of
iron, l, m, n, the first of which contained 4 grains of the salt
dissolved in a cubic inch of water, the second 8 grains, and the
third 16 grains—these were respectively enclosed in three glass
globules, all of which were attracted by the pole of a magnet.
A quantity of the mean solution m was then put into a vessel,
and the globule containing the strongest solution n was immersed
in it, which was attracted as before, but the globule l, containing
the weakest solution, was repelled when plunged into the same
liquid. Here there was a diamagnetic phenomenon, although
the glass globules and the liquid in which they were immersed
contained iron. The effect was evidently differential, for when
the liquid was less attracted than the globule, the globule approached
the pole, and when the liquid was more attracted than
the globule, the latter appeared to recede from the pole. In
fact, the effect is the same as that of gravity on a body immersed
in water; if it be more forcibly attracted than the water, it
sinks; if less forcibly attracted, it rises, the effect being the same
as if it were repelled by the earth. Hence the question, are all
magnetic phenomena the result of a differential action of this
kind, and is the ethereal medium less strongly attracted than
soft iron, and more strongly attracted than bismuth, thus permitting
the approach of the iron, but causing the bismuth to
recede from the pole of a magnet? If such a medium exist, that
is, if the ethereal medium be magnetic, then diamagnetism is
357the same with paramagnetism, and the polarity of the magnetic
force in iron and bismuth is one and the same.
The ethereal medium may be presumed to transmit the gravitating
force; it transmits the magnetism of the solar spots, its
undulations constitute light, heat, and all the influences bound
up in the solar beam; and the most perfect vacuum we can make
is capable of transmitting mechanical energy in enormous quantities,
some of which differ but little from that of air or oxygen
at an ordinary barometric pressure; and why not thus admit, says
Mr. Thomson, the magnetic property, of which we know so little
that we have no right to pronounce a negative?
Mr. Waterstone is also of opinion that it would be taking too
narrow a view if we limited the function of the luminiferous
ether to the conveying of physical pulses only. The atmosphere
also conveys physical pulses, but that is the least important of
its functions in the economy of nature. There is nothing that
should hinder us attributing to the media concerned in the
radiation of light and heat the higher functions of electrical
polarity and gravitation. The special dynamic arrangements
by which this is effected may ever elude our research; but as
there is no limit to the vis viva (N. 222) which such media
may conserve in their minutest parts, so there is no physical
impossibility in that vis viva being suddenly transferred to the
molecules of ordinary matter in the proportion and sequence
required to carry out the order and system of nature.
The fundamental principle of action in such media must be
in accordance with elastic impact, for upon that the dynamic
theory of heat and conservation of force rests as a foundation.
The statical and dynamical characteristics of gravitation and
transfusion of force conform to it, so that all the forces that
hold the molecules of bodies together must also be in subjection
to it.[20]</div></body></text></TEI>