<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="26">
224
SECTION XXV.

Size and Constitution of the Sun—The Solar Spots—Intensity of the
Sun’s Light and Heat—The Sun’s Atmosphere—His influence on the
Planets—Atmospheres of the Planets—The Moon has none—Lunar
heat—The Differential Telescope—Temperature of Space—Internal
Heat of the Earth—Zone of constant Temperature—Increase of Heat
With the Depth—Central Heat—Volcanic Action—Quantity of Heat
received from the Sun—Isogeothermal Lines—Line of perpetual Congelation—Climate—Isothermal
Lines—Same quantity of Heat annually
received and radiated by the Earth.
The sun is a globe 880,000 miles in diameter: what his body may
be it is impossible to conjecture, but it seems to be a dark mass
surrounded by an extensive atmosphere at a certain height in
which there is a stratum of luminous clouds which constitutes
the photosphere of the sun. Above it rises the true solar
atmosphere, visible as an aureola or corona during annular and
total eclipses, and probably the cause of the peculiar phenomena
in the photographic image of the sun already mentioned.
Through occasional openings in the photosphere or mottled
ocean of flame, the dark nucleus appears like black spots, often
of enormous size. These spots are almost always comprised
within a zone of the sun’s surface, whose breadth measured on
a solar meridian does not extend beyond
301⁄2°
on each side of
his equator, though they have been seen at a distance of
391⁄2°.
The dark central part of the spots is surrounded by a succession
of obscure cloudy envelopes increasing in brightness up to a
penumbra, sometimes there are three or more shades, but it
requires a good telescope to distinguish the intermediate ones.
The spots gradually increase in size and number from year
to year to a maximum, and then as gradually decrease to a
minimum, accomplishing regular vicissitudes in periods of about
eleven years, and are singularly connected with the cycles of
terrestrial magnetism. From their extensive and rapid changes,
there is every reason to believe that the exterior and incandescent
part of the sun is gaseous.
Doubts have arisen as to the uniformity of the quantity of
225heat emitted by the sun. Sir William Herschel was the first to
suspect that it was affected by the quantity and magnitude of
the spots on his surface; Professor Secchi has observed that the
spots are less hot than the luminous part; and now Professor
Wolf has perceived that the amount of heat emitted by the sun
varies periodically with the spots every 11·11 years, or nearly
nine times in a century, beginning at the commencement of the
present one. He has discovered a sub-period in that of the
spots, which no doubt has an effect on the quantity of solar heat.
So the unaccountable vicissitudes in the temperature of different
years may ultimately be found to depend upon the constitution
of the sun himself.
The intensity of the sun’s light diminishes from the centre to
the circumference of the solar disc. His direct light has been
estimated to be equal to that of 5563 wax candles of moderate
size placed at the distance of one foot from an object; that of the
moon is probably only equal to the light of one candle at the
distance of 12 feet: consequently the light of the sun is more
than three hundred thousand times greater than that of the
moon. According to Professor Secchi’s experiments at Rome,
the heat of the solar image is almost twice as great at the centre
as at the edge. The maximum heat, however, is not in the
centre, but in the solar equator, and the spots are less hot than
the rest of the surface.
The oceans of light and heat probably arising from electric or
chemical processes of immense energy that continually take place
at the sun’s surface (N. 217) are transmitted in undulations by
the ethereal medium in all directions; but notwithstanding the
sun’s magnitude and the inconceivable intensity of light and heat
that must exist at his surface, as the intensity of both diminishes as
the square of the distance increases, his kindly influence can hardly
be felt at the boundaries of our system. In Uranus the sun
must be seen like a small brilliant star not above the hundred
and fiftieth part as bright as he appears to us, but that is 2000
times brighter than our moon, so that he is really a sun to
Uranus, and may impart some degree of warmth. But if we
consider that water would not remain fluid in any part of Mars,
even at his equator, and that, in the temperate zones of the same
planet, even alcohol and quicksilver would freeze, we may form
some idea of the cold that must reign in Uranus and Neptune.
226The climate of Venus more nearly resembles that of the earth,
though, excepting at her poles, much too hot for animal and
vegetable life such as they exist here, for she receives seven times
as much light and heat as the earth does; but in Mercury the
mean heat from the intensity of the sun’s rays must be above
that of boiling quicksilver, and water would boil even at his
poles. Thus the planets, though kindred with the earth in
motion and form, are, according to our experience, totally unfit
for the habitation of such a being as man, unless indeed their
temperature should be modified by circumstances of which we
are not aware, and which may increase or diminish the sensible
heat so as to render them habitable. In our utter ignorance it
may be observed, that the earth, if visible at all from Neptune,
can only be a minute telescopic object; that from the nearest fixed
star the sun must dwindle to a mere point of light; that the
whole solar system would there be hid by a spider’s thread; and
that the starry firmament itself is only the first series of starry
systems, the numbers of which are bounded alone by the imperfection
of our space-penetrating instruments. In this overwhelming
majesty of creation, it seems rash to affirm that the earth
alone is inhabited by intelligent beings, and thus to limit the
Omnipotent, who has made nothing in vain.
Several of the planets have extensive and dense atmospheres:
according to Schroëter the atmosphere of Ceres is more than 668
miles high, and that of Pallas has an elevation of 465 miles, but
not a trace of an atmosphere can be perceived round Vesta. The
attraction of the earth has probably deprived the moon of hers,
for the refractive power of the air at the surface of the earth is at
least a thousand times as great as at the surface of the moon: the
lunar atmosphere must therefore be of a greater degree of rarity
than can be produced by our best air-pumps. This is confirmed
by Arago’s observations during a solar eclipse, when no trace of a
lunar atmosphere could be seen. Since then, however, some
indications of air have been perceived in the lunar valleys. In
taking photographic images of the moon and Jupiter at Rome,
Professor Secchi found that the light of the full moon is to that
of the quarter moon as 3 to 1. Jupiter gives a photographic
image as bright and vigorous as the brightest part of the moon;
but although the light of Jupiter is less than that of the moon,
he is nearly five times farther from the sun; and as light
227diminishes as the square of the distance increases, the light of
Jupiter is proportionally greater than that of the moon, consequently
Jupiter’s atmosphere reflects more light than the dark
volcanic soil of the moon; thus Professor Secchi observes photography
may in time reveal the quality of the materials of which
the celestial bodies are formed.
The effect of the earth’s atmosphere on lunar heat is remarkable.
Professor Forbes proved that the direct light of the full moon is
incapable of raising a thermometer the one three thousandth part
of a Centigrade degree, at least in England; but at an elevation of
8870 feet on the Peak of Teneriffe, Mr. Piazzi Smyth found a
very sensible heat from the moon, although she was then 19°
south of the equator; so it is no doubt absorbed by our atmosphere
at lower levels.
Some exceedingly interesting experiments might be made by
means of a telescope having a prism attached to its objective
extremity, and furnished with a micrometer, because by it the
difference of the illumination of objects might be determined
with extreme accuracy—as for example, the comparative intensity
between the bright and dark parts of the moon, the comparative
intensity of the solar light reflected by the moon, and
the lumière cendré, or the light of the earth reflected on the moon,
whence a comparison might be made between the light of the sun
and that of the earth. Hence also it might be known whether
the terrestrial hemispheres successively visible from the moon are
more or less luminous, according as they contain more land or
water, and at the same time it might be possible to appreciate
the more or less cloudy or clear state of our atmosphere, so that
in time we might ultimately find in the lumière cendré of the
moon data upon the mean diaphaneity of different terrestrial
hemispheres which are of different temperatures.
It is found by experience that heat is developed in opaque and
translucent substances by their absorption of solar light, but
that the sun’s rays do not sensibly alter the temperature of
perfectly transparent bodies through which they pass. As the
temperature of the pellucid planetary space can be but little
affected by the passage of the sun’s light and heat, neither can
it be sensibly raised by the heat now radiated from the earth.
Doubtless the radiation of all the bodies in the universe maintains
the ethereal medium at a higher temperature than it would
228otherwise have, and must eventually increase it, but by a
quantity so evanescent that it is hardly possible to conceive a
time when a change will become perceptible.
The temperature of space being so low as -239° Fahrenheit,
it becomes a matter of no small interest to ascertain whether the
earth may not be ultimately reduced by radiation to the temperature
of the surrounding medium; what the sources of heat are;
and whether they be sufficient to compensate the loss, and to
maintain the earth in a state fit for the support of animal and
vegetable life in time to come. All observations that have been
made under the surface of the ground concur in proving that there
is a stratum at the depth of from 40 to 100 feet throughout the
whole earth where the temperature is invariable at all times and
seasons, and which differs but little from the mean annual temperature
of the country above. According to M. Boussingault,
that stratum at the equator is at the depth of little more than
a foot in places sheltered from the direct rays of the sun; but
in our climates it is at a much greater depth. In the course of
more than half a century the temperature of the earth at the depth
of 90 feet, in the cellars of the Observatory at Paris, has never
been above or below 53° of Fahrenheit’s thermometer, which is
only 2° above the mean annual temperature at Paris. This
zone, unaffected by the sun’s rays from above, or by the internal
heat from below, serves as an origin whence the effects of the
external heat are estimated on one side, and the internal temperature
of the globe on the other.
As early as the year 1740 M. Gensanne discovered in the lead-mines
of Giromagny, in the Vosges mountains, three leagues from
Béfort, that the heat of the ground increases with the depth below
the zone of constant temperature. A vast number of observations
have been made since that time, in the mines of Europe and
America, by MM. Saussure, Daubuisson, Humboldt, Cordier, Fox,
Reich, and others, which agree, without an exception, in proving
that the temperature of the earth becomes higher in descending
towards its centre. The greatest depth that has been attained is
in the silver-mine of Guanaxato, in Mexico, where M. de Humboldt
found a temperature of 98° at the depth of 285 fathoms, the
mean annual temperature of the country being only 61°. Next
to that is the Dalcoath copper-mine, in Cornwall, where Mr.
Fox’s thermometer stood at 68° in a hole in the rock at the
229depth of 230 fathoms, and at 82° in water at the depth of 240
fathoms, the mean annual temperature at the surface being about
50°. But it is needless to multiply examples, all of which concur
in showing that there is a very great difference between the
temperature in the interior of the earth and at its surface. Mr.
Fox’s observations on the temperature of springs which rise at
profound depths in mines afford the strongest testimony. He
found considerable streams flowing into some of the Cornish
mines at the temperature of 80° or 90°, which is about 30° or
40° above that of the surface, and also ascertained that nearly
2,000,000 gallons of water are daily pumped from the bottom
of the Poldice mine, which is 176 fathoms deep at 90° or 100°.
As this is higher than the warmth of the human body, Mr. Fox
justly observes that it amounts to a proof that the increased
temperature cannot proceed from the persons of the workmen
employed in the mines. Neither can the warmth of mines be
attributed to the condensation of the currents of air which ventilate
them. Mr. Fox, whose opinion is of high authority in
these matters, states that, even in the deepest mines, the condensation
of the air would not raise the temperature more than
5° or 6°; and that, if the heat could be attributed to this cause,
the seasons would sensibly affect the temperature of mines,
which it appears they do not where the depth is great. Besides,
the Cornish mines are generally ventilated by numerous shafts
opening into the galleries from the surface or from a higher
level. The air circulates freely in these, descending in some
shafts and ascending in others. In all cases Mr. Fox found that
the upward currents are of a higher temperature than the descending
currents; so much so, that in winter the moisture is
often frozen in the latter to a considerable depth; the circulation
of air, therefore, tends to cool the mine instead of increasing
the heat. Mr. Fox has also removed the objections arising from
the comparatively low temperature of the water in the shafts of
abandoned mines, by showing that observations in them, from
a variety of circumstances which he enumerates, are too discordant
to furnish any conclusion as to the actual heat of the
earth. The high temperature of mines might be attributed to
the effects of the fires, candles, and gunpowder used by the
miners, did not a similar increase obtain in deep wells, and in
borings to great depths in search of water, where no such causes
230of disturbance occur. In a well dug with a view to discover
salt in the canton of Berne, and long deserted, M. de Saussure
had the most complete evidence of increasing heat. The same
has been confirmed by the temperature of many wells, both in
France and England, especially by the Artesian wells, so named
from a peculiar method of raising water first resorted to in
Artois, and since become very general. An Artesian well consists
of a shaft a few inches in diameter, bored into the earth
till a spring is found. To prevent the water being carried off
by the adjacent strata, a tube is let down which exactly fills the
bore from top to bottom, in which the water rises pure to the
surface. It is clear the water could not rise unless it had previously
descended from high ground through the interior of the
earth to the bottom of the well. It partakes of the temperature
of the strata through which it passes, and in every instance
has been warmer in proportion to the depth of the well; but it
is evident that the law of increase cannot be obtained in this
manner. Perhaps the most satisfactory experiments on record
are those made by MM. Auguste de la Rive and F. Marcet
during the year 1833, in a boring for water about a league from
Geneva, at a place 318 feet above the level of the lake. The
depth of the bore was 727 feet, and the diameter only between
four and five inches. No spring was ever found; but the shaft
filled with mud, from the moisture of the ground mixing with
the earth displaced in boring, which was peculiarly favourable
for the experiments, as the temperature at each depth may be
considered to be that of the particular stratum. In this case,
where none of the ordinary causes of disturbance could exist, and
where every precaution was employed by scientific and experienced
observers, the temperature was found to increase regularly
and uniformly with the depth at the rate of about 1° of
Fahrenheit for every 52 feet. Professor Reich of Freyberg has
found that the mean of a great number of observations both in
mines and wells is 1° of Fahrenheit for every 55 feet of depth;
and from M. Arago’s observations in the Grenelle Artesian well at
Paris, the increase is 1° of Fahrenheit for every 45 feet. Though
there can be no doubt as to the increase of temperature in penetrating
the crust of the earth, there is still much uncertainty as
to the law of increase, which varies with the nature of the soil
and other local circumstances; but, on an average, it has been
231estimated at the rate of 1° for every 50 or 60 feet, which corresponds
with the observations of MM. Marcet and De la Rive.
In consequence of the rapid increase of internal heat, thermal
springs, or such as are independent of volcanic action, rising
from a great depth, must necessarily be very rare and of a high
temperature; and it is actually found that none are so low as
68° of Fahrenheit; that of Chaudes Aigues, in Auvergne, is
about 136°. In many places warm water from Artesian wells
will probably come into use for domestic purposes, and it is
even now employed in manufactories near Stutgardt, in
Alsace, &c.
It is hardly to be expected that at present any information
with regard to the actual internal temperature of the earth
should be obtained from that of the ocean, on account of the
mobility of fluids, by which the colder masses sink downwards,
while those that are warmer rise to the surface. Nevertheless,
it may be stated that the temperature of the sea decreases with
the depth between the tropics; while, on the contrary, all our
northern navigators found that the temperature increases with
the depth in the polar seas. The change takes place about the
70th parallel of latitude. Some ages hence, however, it may be
known whether the earth has arrived at a permanent state as to
heat, by comparing secular observations of the temperature of
the ocean if made at a great distance from the land.
Should the earth’s temperature increase at the rate of 1° for
every 50 feet, it is clear that at the depth of 200 miles the
hardest substances must be in a state of fusion, and our globe
must in that case either be encompassed by a stratum of melted
lava at that depth, or it must be a ball of liquid fire 7600 miles
in diameter, enclosed in a thin coating of solid matter; for 200
miles are nothing when compared with the size of the earth.
No doubt the form of the earth, as determined by the pendulum
and arcs of the meridian, as well as by the motions of the
moon, indicates original fluidity and subsequent consolidation
and reduction of temperature by radiation; but whether the law
of increasing temperature is uniform at still greater depths than
those already attained by man, it is impossible to say. At all
events, internal fluidity is not inconsistent with the present
state of the earth’s surface, since earthy matter is as bad a
conductor of heat as lava, which often retains its heat at a very
232little depth for years after its surface is cool. Whatever the
radiation of the earth might have been in former times, certain
it is that it goes on very slowly in our days; for M. Fourier
has computed that the central heat is decreasing from radiation
by only about the
1⁄30000th
part of a degree in a century. If so,
there can be no doubt that it will ultimately be dissipated; but
as far as regards animal and vegetable life, it is of very little
consequence whether the centre of our planet be liquid fire or
ice, since its condition in either case could have no sensible effect
on the climate at its surface. The internal fire does not even
impart heat enough to melt the snow at the poles, though
nearer to the centre than any other part of the globe.
The immense extent of active volcanic fire is one of the causes
of heat which must not be overlooked.
The range of the Andes from Chile to the north of Mexico,
probably from Cape Horn to Behring Straits, is one vast district
of igneous action, including the Caribbean and the West
Indian Islands on one hand; and stretching quite across the
Pacific Ocean, through the Polynesian Archipelago, the New
Hebrides, the Georgian and Friendly Islands, on the other.
Another chain begins with the Aleutian Islands, extends to
Kamtschatka, and from thence passes through the Kurile,
Japanese, and Philippine Islands, to the Moluccas, whence it
spreads with terrific violence through the Indian Archipelago,
even to the Bay of Bengal. Volcanic action may again be
followed from the entrance of the Persian Gulf to Madagascar,
Bourbon, the Canaries, and Azores. Thence a continuous
igneous region extends through about 1000 geographical miles
to the Caspian Sea, including the Mediterranean, and extending
north and south between the 35th and 40th parallels of latitude;
and in central Asia a volcanic region occupies 2500 square geographical
miles. The volcanic fires are developed in Iceland in
tremendous force; and the antarctic land discovered by Sir
James Ross is an igneous formation of the boldest structure,
where a volcano in high activity rises 12,000 feet above the
perpetual ice of these polar deserts, and within
191⁄2°
of the
south pole. Throughout this vast portion of the world the subterraneous
fire is often intensely active, producing such violent
earthquakes and eruptions that their effects, accumulated during
millions of years, may account for many of the great geological
233changes of igneous origin that have already taken place in the
earth, and may occasion others not less remarkable, should time—that
essential element in the vicissitudes of the globe—be
granted, and their energy last.
Sir Charles Lyell, who has shown the power of existing causes
with great ingenuity, estimates that on an average twenty eruptions
take place annually in different parts of the world; and many
must occur or have happened, even on the most extensive and
awful scale, among people equally incapable of estimating their
effects and of recording them. We should never have known
the extent of the fearful eruption which took place in the island
of Sumbawa, in 1815, but for the accident of Sir Stamford
Raffles having been governor of Java at the time. It began on
the 5th of April, and did not entirely cease till July. The
ground was shaken through an area of 1000 miles in circumference;
the tremors were felt in Java, the Moluccas, a great
part of Celebes, Sumatra, and Borneo. The detonations were
heard in Sumatra, at the distance of 970 geographical miles in a
straight line; and at Ternate, 720 miles in the opposite direction.
The most dreadful whirlwinds carried men and cattle into the
air; and with the exception of 26 persons, the whole population
of the island perished to the amount of 12,000. Ashes were
carried 300 miles to Java in such quantities that the darkness
during the day was more profound than ever had been witnessed
in the most obscure night. The face of the country was changed
by the streams of lava, and by the upheaving and sinking of the
soil. The town of Tomboro was submerged, and water stood to
the depth of 18 feet in places which had been dry land. Ships
grounded where they had previously anchored, and others could
hardly penetrate the mass of cinders which floated on the surface
of the sea for several miles to the depth of two feet. A catastrophe
similar to this, though of less magnitude, took place in
the island of Bali in 1808, which was not heard of in Europe
till years afterwards. The eruption of Coseguina in the Bay of
Fonseca, which began on the 19th of January, 1835, and lasted
many days, was even more dreadful and extensive in its effects
than that of Sumbawa. The ashes during this eruption were
carried by the upper current of the atmosphere as far north as
Chiassa, which is upwards of 400 leagues to the windward of
that volcano. Many volcanoes supposed to be extinct have all
234at once burst out with inconceivable violence. Witness Vesuvius,
on historical record; and the volcano in the island of St.
Vincent in our own days, whose crater was lined with large
trees, and which had not been active in the memory of man.
Vast tracts are of volcanic origin where volcanoes have ceased to
exist for ages. Whence it may be inferred that in some places
the subterraneous fires are in the highest state of activity, in
some they are inert, and in others they appear to be extinct.
Yet there are few countries that are not subject to earthquakes
of greater or less intensity; the tremors are propagated like a
sonorous undulation to such distances that it is impossible to
say in what point they originate. In some recent instances
their power must have been tremendous. In South America,
so lately as 1822, an area of 100,000 square miles, which is
equal in extent to the half of France, was raised several feet
above its present level—a most able account of which is given
in the ‘Transactions of the Geological Society,’ by an esteemed
friend of the author’s, the late Mrs. Graham, who was present
during the whole time of that formidable earthquake, which
recurred at short intervals for more than two months, and
who possessed talents to appreciate, and had opportunities of
observing, its effects under the most favourable circumstances
at Valparaiso, and for miles along the coast where it was most
intense. A considerable elevation of the land has again taken
place along the coast of Chile, in consequence of the violent
earthquake which happened on the 20th of February, 1835.
In 1819 a ridge of land stretching for 50 miles across the
delta of the Indus, 16 feet broad, was raised 10 feet above the
plain. The reader is referred to Sir Charles Lyell’s excellent
‘Principles of Geology,’ already mentioned, for most interesting
details of the phenomena and extensive effects of volcanoes
and earthquakes, too numerous to find a place here.
It may however be mentioned that innumerable earthquakes
are from time to time shaking the solid crust of the globe,
and carrying destruction to distant regions, progressively
though slowly accomplishing the great work of change. A
most disastrous instance took place on the 15th of December,
1857, in the Neapolitan provinces of La Basilicata and Principato
Citeriore, where the destruction was extensive and terrible;
the number of victims, according to the official accounts, being
235returned at upwards of ten thousand. These terrible engines
of ruin, fitful and uncertain as they may seem, must, like all
durable phenomena, have a law which may in time be discovered
by long-continued and accurate observations.
The shell of volcanic fire that girds the globe at a small depth
below our feet has been attributed to different causes. By some
it is supposed to originate in an ocean of incandescent matter,
still existing in the central abyss of the earth. Some conceive
it to be superficial, and due to chemical action, in strata at no
very great depth when compared with the size of the globe. The
more so as matter on a most extensive scale is passing from old
into new combinations, which, if rapidly effected, are capable of
producing the most intense heat. According to others, electricity,
which is so universally diffused in all its forms throughout the
earth, if not the immediate cause of the volcanic phenomena, at
least determines the chemical affinities that produce them. It
is clear that a subject so involved in mystery must give rise to
much speculation, in which every hypothesis is attended with
difficulties that observation alone can remove.
But the views of Mr. Babbage and Sir John Herschel on the
general cause of volcanic action, and the changes in the equilibrium
of the internal heat of the globe, accord more with the
laws of mechanics and radiant heat than any that have been proposed.
The theory of these distinguished philosophers, formed
independently of each other, is equally consistent with observed
phenomena, whether the earth be a solid crust encompassing a
nucleus of liquid lava, or that there is merely a vast reservoir or
stratum of melted matter at a moderate depth below the superficial
crust. The author is indebted to the kindness of Sir
Charles Lyell for the perusal of a most interesting letter from Sir
John Herschel, in which he states his views on the subject.
Supposing that the globe is merely a solid crust, resting upon
fluid or semi-fluid matter, whether extending to the centre or
not, the transfer of pressure from one part of its surface to
another by the degradation of existing continents, and the formation
of new ones, would be sufficient to subvert the equilibrium
of heat in the interior, and occasion volcanic eruptions. For,
since the internal heat of the earth is transmitted outwards by
radiation, an accession of new matter on any part of the surface,
like an addition of clothing, by keeping it in, would raise the
236temperature of the strata below, and in the course of ages would
even reduce those at a great depth to a state of fusion. Some of
the substances might be converted into gases; and should the
accumulation of new matter take place at the bottom of the sea,
as is generally the case, this lava would be mixed with water in
a state of ignition in consequence of the enormous pressure of
the ocean, and of the newly superimposed matter which would
prevent it from expanding into steam. Now Sir Charles Lyell has
shown, with his usual talent, that the quantity of matter carried
down by rivers from the surface of the continents is comparatively
trifling, and that the great transfer to the bottom of the
ocean is produced at the coast-line by the action of the sea;
hence, says Sir John Herschel, “the greatest accumulation of
local pressure is in the central area of the deep sea, while the
greatest local relief takes place along the abraded coast-lines.
Here then should occur the chief volcanic vents.” As the crust
of the earth is much weaker on the coasts than elsewhere, it is
more easily ruptured, and, as Mr. Babbage observes, immense
rents might be produced there by its contraction in cooling down
after being deprived of a portion of its original thickness. The
pressure on the bottom of the ocean would force a column of
lava mixed with ignited water and gas to rise through an opening
thus formed, and, says Sir John Herschel, “when the column
attains such a height that the ignited water can become steam,
the joint specific gravity of the column is suddenly diminished,
and up comes a jet of mixed steam and lava, till so much has
escaped that the matter deposited at the bottom of the ocean
takes a fresh bearing, when the evacuation ceases and the crack
becomes sealed up.”
This theory perfectly accords with the phenomena of nature,
since there are very few active volcanoes at a distance from the
sea, and the exceptions that do occur are generally near lakes, or
they are connected with volcanoes on the maritime coasts. Many
break out even in the bottom of the ocean, probably owing to
some of the supports of the superficial crust giving way, so that
the steam and lava are forced up through the fissures.
Finally, Mr. Babbage observes that, “in consequence of
changes continually going on, by the destruction of forests, the
filling up of seas, the wearing down of elevated lands, the heat
radiated from the earth’s surface varies considerably at different
237periods. In consequence of this variation, and also in consequence
of the covering up of the bottom of the sea by the detritus
of the land, the surfaces of equal temperature within the earth
are continually changing their form, and exposing thick beds
near the exterior to alterations of temperature. The expansion
and contraction of these strata may form rents and veins, produce
earthquakes, determine volcanic eruptions, elevate continents,
and, possibly, raise mountain chains.”
The numerous vents for the internal heat formed by volcanoes,
hot springs, and the emission of steam, so frequent in volcanic
regions, no doubt maintain the tranquillity of the interior fluid
mass, which seems to be perfectly inert unless when put in
motion by unequal pressure.
But, to whatever cause the increasing heat of the earth and
the subterranean fires may ultimately be referred, it is certain
that, except in some local instances, they have no sensible effect
on the temperature of its surface. It may therefore be concluded
that the heat of the earth, above the zone of uniform
temperature, is entirely owing to the sun.
The power of the solar rays depends much upon the manner
in which they fall, as we readily perceive from the different
climates on our globe. Although the sun is about three millions
of miles nearer to the earth in winter than in summer, his rays
strike the atmosphere in the northern hemisphere so obliquely
that it absorbs a much greater quantity of heat than when they
are more direct (N. 217). Indeed it is so great that, when the
sun has an altitude of 30°, one half of his heat is absorbed by the
atmosphere, and it increases very rapidly as he sinks towards the
horizon. However, that heat is not lost: it is most beneficial to
the earth, being really the heat which supplies the greatest part
of that which is radiated into space during the absence of the sun.
Professor Dove has shown, by taking at all seasons the mean of
the temperatures of points on the earth’s surface diametrically
opposite to each other, that the average temperature of the whole
earth’s surface in June, when we are farthest from the sun, considerably
exceeds that in December, when we are nearest to him,
owing to the excess of water in the southern hemisphere, and
that of land in the northern, which gives a general insular
climate to the former, and a continental climate to the latter.
The observations of the north polar navigators, and those of
238Sir John Herschel at the Cape of Good Hope, show that the
direct heating influence of the solar rays is greatest at the equator,
and that it diminishes gradually as the latitude increases. At
the equator the maximum is
483⁄4°,
while in Europe it has never
exceeded
291⁄2°.
M. Pouillet has estimated with singular ingenuity, from a
series of observations made by himself, that the whole quantity
of heat which the earth receives annually from the sun is such as
would be sufficient to melt a stratum of ice covering the whole
globe 46 feet deep. Part of this heat is radiated back into space;
but by far the greater part descends into the earth during the
summer, towards the zone of uniform temperature, whence it
returns to the surface in the course of the winter, and tempers
the cold of the ground and the atmosphere in its passage to the
ethereal regions, where it is lost, or rather where it combines
with the radiation from the other bodies of the universe in maintaining
the temperature of space. The sun’s power being
greatest between the tropics, the heat sinks deeper there than
elsewhere, and the depth gradually diminishes towards the poles;
but the heat is also transmitted laterally from the warmer to the
colder strata north and south of the equator, and aids in tempering
the severity of the polar regions.
The mean heat of the earth, above the stratum of constant
temperature, is determined from that of springs; and, if the
spring be on elevated ground, the temperature is reduced by
computation to what it would be at the level of the sea, assuming
that the heat of the soil varies according to the same law as the
heat of the atmosphere, which is about 1° of Fahrenheit’s thermometer
for every 333·7 feet. From a comparison of the temperature
of numerous springs with that of the air, Sir David
Brewster concludes that there is a particular line passing nearly
through Berlin, at which the temperature of springs and that of
the atmosphere coincide; that in approaching the arctic circle
the temperature of springs is always higher than that of the air,
while, proceeding towards the equator, it is lower.
Since the warmth of the superficial strata of the earth decreases
from the equator to the poles, there are many places in
both hemispheres where the ground has the same mean temperature.
If lines were drawn through all those points in the upper
strata of the globe which have the same mean annual temperature,
239they would be nearly parallel to the equator between the
tropics, and would become more and more irregular and sinuous
towards the poles. These are called isogeothermal lines. A
variety of local circumstances disturb their parallelism, even
between the tropics.
The temperature of the ground at the equator is lower on the
coasts and islands than in the interior of continents; the warmest
part is in the interior of Africa; but it is obviously affected by
the nature of the soil, especially if it be volcanic.
Much has been done to ascertain the manner in which heat
is distributed over the surface of our planet, and the variations
of climate, which, in a general view, mean every change
of the atmosphere, such as of temperature, humidity, variations
of barometric pressure, purity of air, the serenity of the
heavens, the effects of winds, and electric tension. Temperature
depends upon the property which all bodies possess,
more or less, of perpetually absorbing and emitting or radiating
heat. When the interchange is equal, the temperature of a body
remains the same; but, when the radiation exceeds the absorption,
it becomes colder, and vice versâ. In order to determine
the distribution of heat over the surface of the earth, it is necessary
to find a standard by which the temperature in different
latitudes may be compared. For that purpose it is requisite to
ascertain, by experiment, the mean temperature of the day, of
the month, and of the year, at as many places as possible throughout
the earth. The annual average temperature may be found
by adding the mean temperatures of all the months in the year,
and dividing the sum by twelve. The average of ten or fifteen
years will give it approximately; for, although the temperature
in any place maybe subject to very great variations, yet it never
deviates more than a few degrees from its mean state, which consequently
offers a good standard of comparison. As a standard,
however, much greater accuracy is required.
If climate depended solely upon the heat of the sun, all places
having the same latitude would have the same mean annual
temperature. The motion of the sun in the ecliptic, indeed,
occasions perpetual variations in the length of the day, and in the
direction of the rays with regard to the earth; yet, as the cause
is periodic, the mean annual temperature from the sun’s motion
alone must be constant in each parallel of latitude; for it is
240evident that the accumulation of heat in the long days of summer,
which is but little diminished by radiation during the short
nights, is balanced by the small quantity of heat received during
the short days in winter, and its radiation in the long, frosty,
and clear nights. In fact, if the globe were everywhere on a
level with the surface of the sea, and of uniform substance, so as
to absorb and radiate heat equally, the mean heat of the sun
would be regularly distributed over its surface in zones of equal
annual temperature parallel to the equator, from which it would
decrease to each pole as the square of the cosine of the latitude;
and its quantity would only depend upon the altitude of the sun
and atmospheric currents. The distribution of heat, however, in
the same parallel, is very irregular in all latitudes except between
the tropics, where the isothermal lines, or the lines passing
through places of equal mean annual temperature, are more
nearly parallel to the equator. The causes of disturbance are
very numerous; but such as have the greatest influence, according
to M. de Humboldt, to whom we are indebted for the greater
part of what is known on the subject, are the elevation of the
continents, the distribution of land and water over the surface of
the globe exposing different absorbing and radiating powers; the
variations in the surface of the land, as forests, sandy deserts,
verdant plains, rocks, &c.; mountain-chains covered with
masses of snow, which diminish the temperature; the reverberation
of the sun’s rays in the valleys, which increases it; and the
interchange of currents, both of air and water, which mitigates
the rigour of climates; the warm currents from the equator
softening the severity of the polar frosts, and the cold currents
from the poles tempering the intense heat of the equatorial
regions. To these may be added cultivation, though its influence
extends over but a small portion of the globe, only a fourth part
of the land being inhabited.
Temperature decreases with the height above the level of the
sea, as well as with the latitude. The air in the higher regions of
the atmosphere is much cooler than that below, because the warm
air expands as it rises, by which its capacity for heat is increased,
a great proportion becomes latent or absorbed, and less of it
sensible. A portion of air at the surface of the earth whose temperature
is 70° of Fahrenheit, if carried to the height of two
miles and a half, would expand so much that its temperature
241would be reduced 50°; and in the ethereal regions the temperature
is 239° below the zero point of Fahrenheit.
The height at which snow lies perpetually decreases from the
equator to the poles, and is higher in summer than in winter;
but it varies from many circumstances. Snow rarely falls when
the cold is intense and the atmosphere dry. Extensive forests
produce moisture by their evaporation; and high table-lands, on
the contrary, dry and warm the air, because the air at great elevations
is too rare to absorb much of the sun’s heat. In the
Cordilleras of the Andes, plains of only twenty-five square
leagues from their extent raise the temperature as much as 3°
or 4° above what is found at the same altitude on the rapid declivity
of a mountain, consequently the line of perpetual snow
varies according as one or other of these causes prevails. Aspect
in general has also a great influence; yet the line of perpetual
snow is much higher on the northern than on the southern side
of the Himalaya, partly because the air is nearly deprived of its
moisture by precipitation before it arrives at the northern side of
the mountains. On the whole, it appears that the mean height
between the tropics at which the snow lies perpetually is about
15,207 feet above the level of the sea; whereas snow does not
cover the ground continually at the level of the ocean till near the
north pole. In the southern hemisphere, however, the cold is
greater than in the northern. In Sandwich Land, between the
54th and 58th degrees of latitude, perpetual snow and ice extend
to the sea-level; and in the island of S. Georgia, in the 53rd
degree of south latitude, which corresponds with the latitude of
the central counties of England, perpetual snow descends even to
the level of the ocean. It has been shown that this excess of cold
in the southern hemisphere cannot be attributed to the winter
being longer than ours by
73⁄4
days. It is probably owing to the
open sea surrounding the south pole, which permits the icebergs
to descend to a lower latitude by 10° than they do in the northern
hemisphere, on account of the numerous obstructions opposed to
them by the islands and continents about the north pole. Icebergs
from the Arctic seas seldom float farther to the south than
the Azores; whereas those that come from the south pole descend
to as low a latitude as that of the Cape of Good Hope.
The influence of mountain-chains does not wholly depend upon
the line of perpetual congelation. They attract and condense
242the vapours floating in the air, and send them down in torrents
of rain. They radiate heat into the atmosphere at a lower elevation,
and increase the temperature of the valleys by the reflection
of the sun’s rays, and by the shelter they afford against prevailing
winds. But, on the contrary, one of the most general and
powerful causes of cold arising from the vicinity of mountains
is the freezing currents of wind which rush from their lofty
peaks along the rapid declivities, chilling the surrounding
valleys: such is the cutting north wind called the bise in
Switzerland.
Next to elevation, the difference in the radiating and absorbing
powers of the sea and land has the greatest influence in disturbing
the regular distribution of heat. The extent of the dry
land is not above the fourth part of that of the ocean; so that
the general temperature of the atmosphere, regarded as the result
of the partial temperatures of the whole surface of the globe, is
most powerfully modified by the sea. Besides, the ocean acts
more uniformly on the atmosphere than the diversified surface
of the solid mass does, both by the equality of its curvature and
its homogeneity. In opaque substances the accumulation of
heat is confined to the stratum nearest the surface. The seas
become less heated at their surface than the land, because the
solar rays, before being extinguished, penetrate the transparent
liquid to a greater depth and in greater numbers than in the
opaque masses. On the other hand, water has a considerable
radiating power, which, together with evaporation, would reduce
the surface of the ocean to a very low temperature, if the cold
particles did not sink to the bottom on account of their superior
density. The seas preserve a considerable portion of the heat
they receive in summer, and from their saltness do not freeze
so soon as fresh water. So that, in consequence of all these circumstances,
the ocean is not subject to such variations of heat
as the land, and, by imparting its temperature to the winds and
by its currents, it diminishes the rigour of climate on the coasts
and in the islands, which are never subject to such extremes of
heat and cold as are experienced in the interior of continents,
though they are liable to fogs and rain from the evaporation of
the adjacent seas. On each side of the equator to the 48th degree
of latitude, the surface of the ocean is in general warmer
than the air above it. The mean of the difference of the temperature
243at noon and midnight is about 1°·37, the greatest deviation
never exceeding from 0°·36 to 2°·16, which is much
cooler than the air over the land.
On land the temperature depends upon the nature of the soil
and its products, its habitual moisture or dryness. From the
eastern extremity of the Sahara desert quite across Africa, the soil
is almost entirely barren sand; and the Sahara desert itself extends
over an area of 194,000 square leagues, equal to twice the area
of the Mediterranean Sea, and raises the temperature of the air by
radiation from 90° to 100°, which must have a most extensive
influence. On the contrary, vegetation cools the air by evaporation
and the apparent radiation of cold from the leaves of plants, because
they absorb more caloric than they give out. The graminiferous
plains of South America cover an extent ten times greater than
France, occupying no less than about 50,000 square leagues,
which is more than the whole chain of the Andes, and all the
scattered mountain-groups of Brazil. These, together with the
plains of North America and the steppes of Europe and Asia,
must have an extensive cooling effect on the atmosphere if it be
considered that in calm and serene nights they cause the thermometer
to descend 12° or 14°, and that in the meadows and
heaths in England the absorption of heat by the grass is sufficient
to cause the temperature to sink to the point of congelation
during the night for ten months in the year. Forests cool the air
also by shading the ground from the rays of the sun, and by evaporation
from the boughs. Hales found that the leaves of a single
plant of helianthus three feet high exposed nearly forty feet of
surface; and, if it be considered that the woody regions of the river
Amazons, and the higher part of the Orinoco, occupy an area of
260,000 square leagues, some idea may be formed of the torrents
of vapour which rise from the leaves of the forests all over the
globe. However, the frigorific effects of their evaporation are
counteracted in some measure by the perfect calm which reigns
in the tropical wildernesses. The innumerable rivers, lakes,
pools, and marshes interspersed through the continents absorb
caloric, and cool the air by evaporation; but, on account of the
chilled and dense particles sinking to the bottom, deep water
diminishes the cold of winter, so long as ice is not formed.
In consequence of the difference in the radiating and absorbing
powers of the sea and land, their configuration greatly modifies
244the distribution of heat over the surface of the globe. Under
the equator only one-sixth part of the circumference is land;
and the superficial extent of land in the northern and southern
hemispheres is in the proportion of three to one. The
effect of this unequal division is greater in the temperate
than in the torrid zones, for the area of land in the northern
temperate zone is to that in the southern as thirteen to one,
whereas the proportion of land between the equator and each
tropic is as five to four. It is a curious fact, noticed by Mr.
Gardner, that only one twenty-seventh part of the land of the
globe has land diametrically opposite to it. This disproportionate
arrangement of the solid part of the globe has a powerful
influence on the temperature of the southern hemisphere. But,
besides these greater modifications, the peninsulas, promontories,
and capes, running out into the ocean, together with bays and
internal seas, all affect temperature. To these may be added the
position of continental masses with regard to the cardinal points.
All these diversities of land and water influence temperature by the
agency of the winds. On this account the temperature is lower
on the eastern coasts both of the New and Old World than on
the western; for, considering Europe as an island, the general
temperature is mild in proportion as the aspect is open to the
Atlantic Ocean, the superficial temperature of which, as far north
as the 45th and 50th degrees of latitude, does not fall below 48°
or 51° of Fahrenheit, even in the middle of winter. On the contrary,
the cold of Russia arises from its exposure to the northern
and eastern winds. But the European part of that empire has a
less rigorous climate than the Asiatic, because it does not extend
to so high a latitude.
The interposition of the atmosphere modifies all the effects
of the sun’s heat. The earth communicates its temperature so
slowly, that M. Arago has occasionally found as much as from
14° to 18° of difference between the heat of the soil and that of
the air two or three inches above it.
The circumstances which have been enumerated, and many
more, concur in disturbing the regular distribution of heat over
the globe, and occasion numberless local irregularities. Nevertheless
the mean annual temperature becomes gradually lower
from the equator to the poles. But the diminution of mean heat
is most rapid between the 40th and 45th degrees of latitude both
245in Europe and America, which accords perfectly with theory;
whence it appears that the variation in the square of the cosine
of the latitude (N. 127), which expresses the law of the change
of temperature, is a maximum towards the 45th degree of latitude.
The mean annual temperature under the equator in America
is about
811⁄2°
of Fahrenheit: in Africa it is said to be nearly 83°.
The difference probably arises from the winds of Siberia and
Canada, whose chilly influence is sensibly felt in Asia and America,
even within 18° of the equator.
The isothermal lines are nearly parallel to the equator, till
about the 22nd degree of latitude on each side of it, where they
begin to lose their parallelism, and continue to do so more
and more as the latitude augments. With regard to the
northern hemisphere, the isothermal line of 59° of Fahrenheit
passes between Rome and Florence in latitude 43°; and near
Raleigh in North Carolina, latitude 36°: that of 50° of equal
annual temperature runs through the Netherlands, latitude 51°;
and near Boston in the United States, latitude
421⁄2°.
that of 41°
passes near Stockholm, latitude
591⁄2°;
and St. George’s Bay,
Newfoundland, latitude 48°: and lastly, the line of 32°, the
freezing point of water, passes between Ulea in Lapland, latitude
66°, and Table Bay, on the coast of Labrador, latitude 54°.
Thus it appears that the isothermal lines, which are nearly
parallel to the equator for about 22°, afterwards deviate more
and more. From observations made during the numerous
voyages in the Arctic Seas, it is found that the isothermal lines
of Europe and America entirely separate in the high latitudes,
and surround two poles of maximum cold: one, in 79° N. lat.
and 120° E. long., has a mean temperature of 2° Fahrenheit;
and the other, whose temperature was determined by Sir David
Brewster to be
31⁄2°
Fahrenheit, from the observations of Sir
Edward Parry is near Melville Island. The pole of the earth’s
rotation, whose mean temperature is probably not below 15°
Fahrenheit, is nearly midway between the two; and the line
which joins these points of maximum cold is almost coincident
with that diameter of the polar basin which bisects it, and passes
through its two great outlets into the Pacific and Atlantic
Oceans, a most remarkable feature, and strongly indicative of
the absence of land, and of the prevalence of a materially milder
246climate in the polar Ocean, probably not under 15° Fahrenheit.[12]
It is believed that two corresponding poles of maximum cold
exist in the southern hemisphere, though observations are wanting
to trace the course of the southern isothermal lines with the
same accuracy as the northern.
The isothermal lines, or such as pass through places where
the mean annual temperature of the air is the same, do not
always coincide with the isogeothermal lines, which are those
passing through places where the mean temperature of the
ground is the same. Sir David Brewster, in discussing this subject,
finds that the isogeothermal lines are always parallel to the
isothermal lines; consequently the same general formula will
serve to determine both, since the difference is a constant quantity
obtained by observation, and depending upon the distance
of the place from the neutral isothermal line. These results are
confirmed by the observations of M. Kupffer of Kasan during
his excursions to the north, which show that the European and
the American portions of the isogeothermal line of 32° of Fahrenheit
actually separate, and go round the two poles of maximum
cold. This traveller remarked, also, that the temperature both
of the air and of the soil decreases most rapidly towards the 45th
degree of latitude.
It is evident that places may have the same mean annual
temperature, and yet differ materially in climate. In one, the
winters may be mild and the summers cool; whereas another
may experience the extremes of heat and cold. Lines passing
through places having the same mean summer or winter temperature
are neither parallel to the isothermal, the geothermal lines,
nor to one another, and they differ still more from the parallels
of latitude. In Europe, the latitude of two places which have
the same annual heat never differs more than 8° or 9°; whereas
the difference in the latitude of those having the same mean
winter temperature is sometimes as much as 18° or 19°. At
Kasan, in the interior of Russia, in latitude 55°·48, nearly the
same with that of Edinburgh, the mean annual temperature is
about 37°·6; at Edinburgh it is 47°·84. At Kasan the mean
summer temperature is 64°·84, and that of winter 2°·12; whereas
247at Edinburgh the mean summer temperature is 58°·28, and that
of winter 38°·66. Whence it appears that the difference of
winter temperature is much greater than that of summer. At
Quebec the summers are as warm as those in Paris, and grapes
sometimes ripen in the open air: whereas the winters are as severe
as in Petersburgh; the snow lies five feet deep for several months,
wheel carriages cannot be used, the ice is too hard for skating,
travelling is performed in sledges, and frequently on the ice of
the river St. Lawrence. The cold at Melville Island on the 15th
of January, 1820, according to Sir Edward Parry, was 55° below
the zero of Fahrenheit’s thermometer; and when Dr. Kane was
on the northern coast of Greenland it was 70° below that point;
yet the summer heat during the day in these high latitudes is
insupportable.
Observations tend to prove that all the climates of the earth
are stable, and that their vicissitudes are only periods or oscillations
of more or less extent, which vanish in the mean annual
temperature of a sufficient number of years. This constancy of
the mean annual temperature of the different places on the surface
of the globe shows that the same quantity of heat which is
annually received by the earth is annually radiated into space;
and that would be the case even if the quantity of heat emitted
by the sun should vary with his spots, for, if more were received,
more would be radiated. Nevertheless, a variety of causes may
disturb the climate of a place; cultivation may make it warmer;
but it is at the expense of some other place, which becomes
colder in the same proportion. There may be a succession of
cold summers and mild winters, but in some other country the
contrary takes place to effect the compensation; wind, rain,
snow, fog, and the other meteoric phenomena, are the ministers
employed to accomplish the changes. The distribution of heat
may vary with a variety of circumstances; but the absolute
quantity lost and gained by the whole earth in the course of a
year, if not invariably the same, is at least periodical.</div></body></text></TEI>