<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences</title><author>Mary Somerville</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1834</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="32">
316
SECTION XXXI.

Electro-Dynamics—Reciprocal Action of Electric Currents—Identity of
Electro-Dynamic Cylinders and Magnets—Differences between the Action
of Voltaic Electricity and Electricity of Tension—Effects of a Voltaic
Current—Ampère’s Theory—Dr. Faraday’s Experiment of Electrifying
and Magnetising a Ray of Light.
The science of electro-magnetism, which must render the name
of M. Oersted ever memorable, relates to the reciprocal action of
electrical and magnetic currents: M. Ampère, by discovering the
mutual action of electrical currents on one another, has added a
new branch to the subject, to which he has given the name of
electro-dynamics.
When electric currents are passing through two conducting
wires, so suspended or supported as to be capable of moving both
towards and from one another, they show mutual attraction or
repulsion, according as the currents are flowing in the same or in
contrary directions; the phenomena varying with the relative
inclinations and positions of the streams of electricity. The
mutual action of such currents, whether they flow in the same or
in contrary directions, whether they be parallel, perpendicular,
diverging, converging, circular, or heliacal, all produce different
kinds of motion in a conducting wire, both rectilineal and circular,
and also the rotation of a wire helix, such as that described,
now called an electro-dynamic cylinder on account of some improvements
in its construction (N. 225). And, as the hypothesis
of a force varying inversely as the square of the distance accords
perfectly with all the observed phenomena, these motions come
under the same laws of dynamics and analysis as any other
branch of physics.
Electro-dynamic cylinders act on each other precisely as if
they were magnets during the time the electricity is flowing
through them. All the experiments that can be performed with
the cylinder might be accomplished with a magnet. That end of
the cylinder in which the current of positive electricity is moving
in a direction similar to the motion of the hands of a watch, acts
317as the south pole of a magnet, and the other end, in which the
current is flowing in a contrary direction, exhibits northern
polarity.
The phenomena mark a very decided difference between the
action of electricity in motion or at rest, that is, between Voltaic
and static electricity; the laws they follow are in many respects
of an entirely different nature, though the electricities themselves
are identical. Since Voltaic electricity flows perpetually, it
cannot be accumulated, and consequently has no tension, or
tendency to escape from the wires which conduct it. Nor do
these wires either attract or repel light bodies in their vicinity,
whereas static or ordinary electricity can be accumulated in insulated
bodies to a great degree, and in that state of rest the
tendency to escape is proportional to the quantity accumulated
and the resistance it meets with. In ordinary electricity, the
law of action is, that dissimilar electricities attract and similar
electricities repel one another. In Voltaic electricity, on the
contrary, similar currents, or such as are moving in the same
direction, attract one another, while a mutual repulsion is exerted
between dissimilar currents, or such as flow in opposite directions.
Common electricity escapes when the pressure of the atmosphere
is removed, but the electro-dynamical effects are the same whether
the conductors be in air or in vacuo.
The effects produced by a current of electricity depend upon
the celerity of its motion through a conducting wire. Yet we
are ignorant whether the motion be uniform or varied, but the
method of transmission has a marked influence on the results;
for, when it flows without intermission, it occasions a deviation
in the magnetic needle, but it has no effect whatever when its
motion is discontinuous or interrupted, like the current produced
by the common electrical machine when a communication is
made between the positive and negative conductors.
M. Ampère has established a theory of electro-magnetism
suggested by the analogy between electro-dynamic cylinders and
magnets, founded upon the reciprocal attraction of electro-currents,
to which he reduces all the phenomena of magnetism and
electro-magnetism, by assuming that the magnetic properties
which bodies possess derive these properties from currents of
electricity, circulating about every part in one uniform direction.
Although every particle of a magnet possesses like properties
318with the whole, yet the general effect is the same as if the magnetic
properties were confined to the surface. Consequently,
Ampère concludes that the internal electro-currents must compensate
one another, and that the magnetism of a body must
therefore arise from a superficial current of electricity constantly
circulating in a direction perpendicular to the axis of the magnet;
so that the reciprocal action of magnets and all the phenomena
of electro-magnetism are reduced to the action and reaction of
superficial currents of electricity, acting at right angles to their
direction.
Notwithstanding the experiments made by Ampère to elucidate
the subject, there is still an uncertainty in the theory of the
induction of magnetism by an electric current in a body near it.
It does not appear whether electric currents which did not
previously exist are actually produced by induction, or if its
effect be only to give one uniform direction to the infinite number
of electric currents previously existing in the particles of the
body, and thus rendering them capable of exhibiting magnetic
phenomena, in the same manner as polarization reduces the
undulations of light to one plane, which had previously been
performed in every plane. Possibly both may be combined in
producing the effect; for the action of the electric current may
not only give a common direction to those already existing, but
may also increase their intensity. However that may be, by
assuming that the attractions and repulsions of the elementary
portions of electric currents vary inversely as the square of the
distance, the actions being at right angles to the direction of the
current, it is found that the attraction and repulsion of a current
of indefinite length on the elementary portion of a parallel current
at any distance from it are in the simple ratio of the shortest
distance between them: consequently, the reciprocal action of
electric currents is reduced to the composition and resolution of
forces, so that the phenomena of electro-magnetism are brought
under the laws of mechanics by the theory of Ampère. It
appears that Dr. Faraday’s very remarkable experiment of electrifying
and magnetising a ray of polarized light may possibly
afford a demonstration of the reality of Ampère’s explanation of
the ultimate nature of magnetism.
In this experiment a copper wire 501 feet long was arranged
in four concentric spirals, the extremities of which were connected
319with the poles of a powerful galvanic battery, and a polished
prism of heavy glass, or silicated borate of lead, was placed in the
axis of the spiral as a core, through the length or axis of which
a ray of polarized light was sent. This ray, viewed through a
piece of tourmaline or a Nichol’s eye-piece, vanished and reappeared
as usual at each quarter revolution of the eye-piece; but when a
current of electricity was sent through the spiral at the time the
ray had vanished, it instantly reappeared, and remained as long as
the electric current continued to flow; but the instant the electricity
ceased the light vanished, and as often as the electric current
flowed through the spiral, or was interrupted, so often did the
polarized ray appear and vanish.
The character of the force thus impressed on the heavy glass
is that of rotation, for the stopping and renewing of the electric
current had the same effect as the revolving motion of the eye-piece
in making the light alternately appear and vanish. Accordingly,
Dr. Faraday found that, when the electricity flowed
through the spiral in one direction, the rotation of the plane of
polarization was right-handed; and when it flowed in the other
direction, the rotation of the plane of polarization was left-handed,
the rotation increasing with the length of the prism and the
intensity of the electricity. The same phenomena were produced
by a very powerful magnet when a ray of polarized light was
sent through the heavy glass parallel to the line of magnetic
force.
Heavy glass or silico-borate of lead has the property more than
any other substance of making light rotate under electric and
magnetic influence; but many substances have the property
more or less, as flint and crown glass, rock salt, all the fixed and
essential oils, water, and many other liquids, but none of the
gases possess it. In those substances that have the power of
circular polarization naturally, the magnetic and electric influences
increase or diminish the rotation according to its direction.
Polarized heat is made to revolve in the same manner, when
the medium through which it passes is subject to magnetic
influence.
Mr. Grove observes that if light and heat be merely modes of
force, which there is every reason to believe that they are, it
may be fairly stated that in these experiments magnetism affects
these forces directly; for light and heat being, in that view,
320motions of ordinary matter, magnetism in affecting these movements
affects the forces which occasion them. If, however, this
effect of magnetism be a molecular change of the matter transmitting
the light and heat, then it follows that the light and heat
are indirectly affected by the electricity or magnetism. Dr.
Faraday says that the magnetic forces do not act on the ray
of light directly, without the intervention of matter, but
through the mediation of the substance in which they and the
ray have a simultaneous existence; the substances and the forces
giving to and receiving from each other the power of acting on
the light. Dr. Thomson has shown, by a mathematical investigation
of the subject, that Dr. Faraday’s discovery seems to prove
the truth of Ampère’s explanation of the ultimate nature of
magnetism. However, in Ampère’s theory, the current of electricity
flowing round the iron makes it a permanent magnet, but
it does not make the heavy glass or the other bodies, which have
the same property, either temporary magnets when the light is
rotating within them, or permanent magnets when the inductive
action of the current of electricity ceases. Hence the molecular
condition of the substances, when the light is rotating in them,
must be specifically distinct from that of magnetised iron: it
must therefore be a new magnetic condition, and the force which
the matter in this state possesses must be a new magnetic force.
After describing his admirable experiment, Dr. Faraday observes
that “it has established for the first time a true, direct
relation and dependence between light and the magnetic and
electric forces; and thus a great addition is made to the facts
and considerations which tend to prove that all natural forces are
tied together, and have one common origin. It is no doubt difficult,
in the present state of our knowledge, to express our expectations
in exact terms; and though I have said that another of
the powers of nature is in these experiments directly related to the
rest, I ought perhaps rather to say that another form of the
great power is distinctly and directly related to the other forms;
or that the great power manifested by particular phenomena in
particular forms is here further identified and recognised by the
direct relation of its form of light to its forms of electricity and
magnetism. The relation existing between polarized light and
magnetism and electricity is even more interesting than if it had
been shown to exist with common light only. It cannot but
321extend to common light; and, as it belongs to light made in a
certain respect more precise in its character and properties by
polarization, it collates and connects it with these powers in that
duality of character which they possess, and yields an opening,
which before was wanting to us, for the appliances of these to the
investigation of the nature of this and other radiant agencies.”
Thus Dr. Faraday’s experiment not only shows the increasing
connexion between the sciences, but the tendency of all the
forces of nature to merge in one great and universal power.
In the action of a magnet upon the stratifications of an electrical
discharge Mr. Gassiot has discovered a new instance of the
connexion between magnetism and light.</div></body></text></TEI>