<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Essays, Letters from Abroad, Translations and Fragments</title><author>Shelley, Percy Bysshe (1792-1822)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Edward Moxon</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1840</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="2">
      ON A FUTURE STATE
    

      It has been the persuasion of an immense majority of human beings in all
      ages and nations that we continue to live after death,—that apparent
      termination of all the functions of sensitive and intellectual existence.
      Nor has mankind been contented with supposing that species of existence
      which some philosophers have asserted; namely, the resolution of the
      component parts of the mechanism of a living being into its elements, and
      the impossibility of the minutest particle of these sustaining the
      smallest diminution. They have clung to the idea that sensibility and
      thought, which they have distinguished from the objects of it, under the
      several names of spirit and matter, is, in its own nature, less
      susceptible of division and decay, and that, when the body is resolved
      into its elements, the principle which animated it will remain perpetual
      and unchanged. Some philosophers-and those to whom we are indebted for the
      most stupendous discoveries in physical science, suppose, on the other
      hand, that intelligence is the mere result of certain combinations among
      the particles of its objects; and those among them who believe that we
      live after death, recur to the interposition of a supernatural power,
      which shall overcome the tendency inherent in all material combinations,
      to dissipate and be absorbed into other forms.
    

      Let us trace the reasonings which in one and the other have conducted to
      these two opinions, and endeavour to discover what we ought to think on a
      question of such momentous interest. Let us analyse the ideas and feelings
      which constitute the contending beliefs, and watchfully establish a
      discrimination between words and thoughts. Let us bring the question to
      the test of experience and fact; and ask ourselves, considering our nature
      in its entire extent, what light we derive from a sustained and
      comprehensive view of its component parts, which may enable, us to assert,
      with certainty, that we do or do not live after death.
    

      The examination of this subject requires that it should be stript of all
      those accessory topics which adhere to it in the common opinion of men.
      The existence of a God, and a future state of rewards and punishments, are
      totally foreign to the subject. If it be proved that the world is ruled by
      a Divine Power, no inference necessarily can be drawn from that
      circumstance in favour of a future state. It has been asserted, indeed,
      that as goodness and justice are to be numbered among the attributes of
      the Deity, He will undoubtedly compensate the virtuous who suffer during
      life, and that He will make every sensitive being who does not deserve
      punishment, happy for ever. But this view of the subject, which it would
      be tedious as well as superfluous to develop and expose, satisfies no
      person, and cuts the knot which we now seek to untie. Moreover, should it
      be proved, on the other hand, that the mysterious principle which
      regulates the proceedings of the universe, is neither intelligent nor
      sensitive, yet it is not an inconsistency to suppose at the same time,
      that the animating power survives the body which it has animated, by laws
      as independent of any supernatural agent as those through which it first
      became united with it. Nor, if a future state be clearly proved, does it
      follow that it will be a state of punishment or reward.
    

      By the word death, we express that condition in which natures resembling
      ourselves apparently cease to be that which they were. We no longer hear
      them speak, nor see them move. If they have sensations and apprehensions,
      we no longer participate in them. We know no more than that those external
      organs, and all that fine texture of material frame, without which we have
      no experience that life or thought can subsist, are dissolved and
      scattered abroad. The body is placed under the earth, and after a certain
      period there remains no vestige even of its form. This is that
      contemplation of inexhaustible melancholy, whose shadow eclipses the
      brightness of the world. The common observer is struck with dejection at
      the spectacle. He contends in vain against the persuasion of the grave,
      that the dead indeed cease to be. The corpse at his feet is prophetic of
      his own destiny. Those who have preceded him, and whose voice was
      delightful to his ear; whose touch met his like sweet and subtle fire;
      whose aspect spread a visionary light upon his path—these he cannot
      meet again. The organs of sense are destroyed, and the intellectual
      operations dependent on them have perished with their sources. How can a
      corpse see or feel? its eyes are eaten out, and its heart is black and
      without motion. What intercourse can two heaps of putrid clay and
      crumbling bones hold together? When you can discover where the fresh
      colours of the faded flower abide, or the music of the broken lyre, seek
      life among the dead. Such are the anxious and fearful contemplations of
      the common observer, though the popular religion often prevents him from
      confessing them even to himself.
    

      The natural philosopher, in addition to the sensations common to all men
      inspired by the event of death, believes that he sees with more certainty
      that it is attended with the annihilation of sentiment and thought. He
      observes the mental powers increase and fade with those of the body, and
      even accommodate themselves to the most transitory changes of our physical
      nature. Sleep suspends many of the faculties of the vital and intellectual
      principle; drunkenness and disease will either temporarily or permanently
      derange them. Madness or idiotcy may utterly extinguish the most excellent
      and delicate of those powers. In old age the mind gradually withers; and
      as it grew and was strengthened with the body, so does it together with
      the body sink into decrepitude. Assuredly these are convincing evidences
      that so soon as the organs of the body are subjected to the laws of
      inanimate matter, sensation, and perception, and apprehension, are at an
      end. It is probable that what we call thought is not an actual being, but
      no more than the relation between certain parts of that infinitely varied
      mass, of which the rest of the universe is composed, and which ceases to
      exist so soon as those parts change their position with regard to each
      other. Thus colour, and sound, and taste, and odour exist only relatively.
      But let thought be considered as some peculiar substance, which permeates,
      and is the cause of, the animation of living beings. Why should that
      substance be assumed to be something essentially distinct from all others,
      and exempt from subjection to those laws from which no other substance is
      exempt? It differs, indeed, from all other substances, as electricity, and
      light, and magnetism, and the constituent parts of air and earth,
      severally differ from all others. Each of these is subject to change and
      to decay, and to conversion into other forms. Yet the difference between
      light and earth is scarcely greater than that which exists between life,
      or thought, and fire. The difference between the two former was never
      alleged as an argument for the eternal permanence of either, in that form
      under which they first might offer themselves to our notice. Why should
      the difference between the two latter substances be an argument for the
      prolongation of the existence of one and not the other, when the existence
      of both has arrived at their apparent termination? To say that fire exists
      without manifesting any of the properties of fire, such as light, heat,
      etc., or that the principle of life exists without consciousness, or
      memory, or desire, or motive, is to resign, by an awkward distortion of
      language, the affirmative of the dispute. To say that the principle of
      life MAY exist in distribution among various forms, is to assert what
      cannot be proved to be either true or false, but which, were it true,
      annihilates all hope of existence after death, in any sense in which that
      event can belong to the hopes and fears of men. Suppose, however, that the
      intellectual and vital principle differs in the most marked and essential
      manner from all other known substances; that they have all some
      resemblance between themselves which it in no degree participates. In what
      manner can this concession be made an argument for its imperishability?
      All that we see or know perishes and is changed. Life and thought differ
      indeed from everything else. But that it survives that period, beyond
      which we have no experience of its existence, such distinction and
      dissimilarity affords no shadow of proof, and nothing but our own desires
      could have led us to conjecture or imagine. Have we existed before birth?
      It is difficult to conceive the possibility of this. There is, in the
      generative principle of each animal and plant, a power which converts the
      substances by which it is surrounded into a substance homogeneous with
      itself. That is, the relations between certain elementary particles of
      matter undergo a change, and submit to new combinations. For when we use
      the words PRINCIPLE, POWER, CAUSE, we mean to express no real being, but
      only to class under those terms a certain series of co-existing phenomena;
      but let it be supposed that this principle is a certain substance which
      escapes the observation of the chemist and anatomist. It certainly MAY BE;
      though it is sufficiently unphilosophical to allege the possibility of an
      opinion as a proof of its truth. Does it see, hear, feel, before its
      combination with those organs on which sensation depends? Does it reason,
      imagine, apprehend, without those ideas which sensation alone can
      communicate? If we have not existed before birth; if, at the period when
      the parts of our nature on which thought and life depend, seem to be woven
      together; if there are no reasons to suppose that we have existed before
      that period at which our existence apparently commences, then there are no
      grounds for supposition that we shall continue to exist after our
      existence has apparently ceased. So far as thought is concerned, the same
      will take place with regard to use, individually considered, after death,
      as had place before our birth.
    

      It is said that it, is possible that we should continue to exist in some
      mode totally inconceivable to us at present. This is a most unreasonable
      presumption. It casts on the adherents of annihilation the burthen of
      proving the negative of a question, the affirmative of which is not
      supported by a single argument, and which, by its very nature, lies beyond
      the experience of the human understanding. It is sufficiently easy,
      indeed, to form any proposition, concerning which we are ignorant, just
      not so absurd as not to be contradictory in itself, and defy refutation.
      The possibility of whatever enters into the wildest imagination to
      conceive is thus triumphantly vindicated. But it is enough that such
      assertions should be either contradictory to the known laws of nature, or
      exceed the limits of our experience, that their fallacy or irrelevancy to
      our consideration should be demonstrated. They persuade, indeed, only
      those who desire to be persuaded. This desire to be for ever as we are;
      the reluctance to a violent and unexperienced change, which is common to
      all the animated and inanimate combinations of the universe, is, indeed,
      the secret persuasion which has given birth to the opinions of a future
      state.
    

      [1815; publ. 1840]
    





 



</div></body></text></TEI>