<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Essays, Letters from Abroad, Translations and Fragments</title><author>Shelley, Percy Bysshe (1792-1822)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Edward Moxon</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1840</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="7">
      CHAPTER II
    

      It is foreign to the general scope of this little treatise to encumber a
      simple argument by controverting any of the trite objections of habit or
      fanaticism. But there are two; the first, the basis of all political
      mistake, and the second, the prolific cause and effect of religious error,
      which it seems useful to refute.
    

      First, it is inquired, 'Wherefore should a man be benevolent and just?'
      The answer has been given in the preceding chapter.
    

      If a man persists to inquire why he ought to promote the happiness of
      mankind, he demands a mathematical or metaphysical reason for a moral
      action. The absurdity of this scepticism is more apparent, but not less
      real than the exacting a moral reason for a mathematical or metaphysical
      fact. If any person should refuse to admit that all the radii of a circle
      are of equal length, or that human actions are necessarily determined by
      motives, until it could be proved that these radii and these actions
      uniformly tended to the production of the greatest general good, who would
      not wonder at the unreasonable and capricious association of his ideas?
    

      The writer of a philosophical treatise may, I imagine, at this advanced
      era of human intellect, be held excused from entering into a controversy
      with those reasoners, if such there are, who would claim an exemption from
      its decrees in favour of any one among those diversified systems of
      obscure opinion respecting morals, which, under the name of religions,
      have in various ages and countries prevailed among mankind. Besides that
      if, as these reasoners have pretended, eternal torture or happiness will
      ensue as the consequence of certain actions, we should be no nearer the
      possession of a standard to determine what actions were right and wrong,
      even if this pretended revelation, which is by no means the case, had
      furnished us with a complete catalogue of them. The character of actions
      as virtuous or vicious would by no means be determined alone by the
      personal advantage or disadvantage of each moral agent individually
      considered. Indeed, an action is often virtuous in proportion to the
      greatness of the personal calamity which the author willingly draws upon
      himself by daring to perform it. It is because an action produces an
      overbalance of pleasure or pain to the greatest number of sentient beings,
      and not merely because its consequences are beneficial or injurious to the
      author of that action, that it is good or evil. Nay, this latter
      consideration has a tendency to pollute the purity of virtue, inasmuch as
      it consists in the motive rather than in the consequences of an action. A
      person who should labour for the happiness of mankind lest he should be
      tormented eternally in Hell, would, with reference to that motive, possess
      as little claim to the epithet of virtuous, as he who should torture,
      imprison, and burn them alive, a more usual and natural consequence of
      such principles, for the sake of the enjoyments of Heaven.
    

      My neighbour, presuming on his strength, may direct me to perform or to
      refrain from a particular action; indicating a certain arbitrary penalty
      in the event of disobedience within power to inflict. My action, if
      modified by his menaces, can no degree participate in virtue. He has
      afforded me no criterion as to what is right or wrong. A king, or an
      assembly of men, may publish a proclamation affixing any penalty to any
      particular action, but that is not immoral because such penalty is
      affixed. Nothing is more evident than that the epithet of virtue is
      inapplicable to the refraining from that action on account of the evil
      arbitrarily attached to it. If the action is in itself beneficial, virtue
      would rather consist in not refraining from it, but in firmly defying the
      personal consequences attached to its performance.
    

      Some usurper of supernatural energy might subdue the whole globe to his
      power; he might possess new and unheard-of resources for enduing his
      punishments with the most terrible attributes or pain. The torments of his
      victims might be intense in their degree, and protracted to an infinite
      duration. Still the 'will of the lawgiver' would afford no surer criterion
      as to what actions were right or wrong. It would only increase the
      possible virtue of those who refuse to become the instruments of his
      tyranny.
    

      II—MORAL SCIENCE CONSISTS IN CONSIDERING THE DIFFERENCE, NOT THE
      RESEMBLANCE, OF PERSONS
    

      The internal influence, derived from the constitution of the mind from
      which they flow, produces that peculiar modification of actions, which
      makes them intrinsically good or evil.
    

      To attain an apprehension of the importance of this distinction, let us
      visit, in imagination, the proceedings of some metropolis. Consider the
      multitude of human beings who inhabit it, and survey, in thought, the
      actions of the several classes into which they are divided. Their obvious
      actions are apparently uniform: the stability of human society seems to be
      maintained sufficiently by the uniformity of the conduct of its members,
      both with regard to themselves, and with regard to others. The labourer
      arises at a certain hour, and applies himself to the task enjoined him.
      The functionaries of government and law are regularly employed in their
      offices and courts. The trader holds a train of conduct from which he
      never deviates. The ministers of religion employ an accustomed language,
      and maintain a decent and equable regard. The army is drawn forth, the
      motions of every soldier are such as they were expected to be; the general
      commands, and his words are echoed from troop to troop. The domestic
      actions of men are, for the most part, undistinguishable one from the
      other, at a superficial glance. The actions which are classed under the
      general appellation of marriage, education, friendship, &c., are
      perpetually going on, and to a superficial glance, are similar one to the
      other.
    

      But, if we would see the truth of things, they must be stripped of this
      fallacious appearance of uniformity. In truth, no one action has, when
      considered in its whole extent, any essential resemblance with any other.
      Each individual, who composes the vast multitude which we have been
      contemplating, has a peculiar frame of mind, which, whilst the features of
      the great mass of his actions remain uniform, impresses the minuter
      lineaments with its peculiar hues. Thus, whilst his life, as a whole, is
      like the lives of other men, in detail, it is most unlike; and the more
      subdivided the actions become; that is, the more they enter into that
      class which have a vital influence on the happiness of others and his own,
      so much the more are they distinct from those of other men.
    

      Those little, nameless, unremembered acts
          Of kindness and of love,


      as well as those deadly outrages which are inflicted by a look, a word—or
      less—the very refraining from some faint and most evanescent
      expression of countenance; these flow from a profounder source than the
      series of our habitual conduct, which, it has been already said, derives
      its origin from without. These are the actions, and such as these, which
      make human life what it is, and are the fountains of all the good and evil
      with which its entire surface is so widely and impartially overspread; and
      though they are called minute, they are called so in compliance with the
      blindness of those who cannot estimate their importance. It is in the due
      appreciating the general effects of their peculiarities, and in
      cultivating the habit of acquiring decisive knowledge respecting the
      tendencies arising out of them in particular cases, that the most
      important part of moral science consists. The deepest abyss of these vast
      and multitudinous caverns, it is necessary that we should visit.
    

      This is the difference between social and individual man. Not that this
      distinction is to be considered definite, or characteristic of one human
      being as compared with another; it denotes rather two classes of agency,
      common in a degree to every human being. None is exempt, indeed, from that
      species of influence which affects, as it were, the surface of his being,
      and gives the specific outline to his conduct. Almost all that is
      ostensible submits to that legislature created by the general
      representation of the past feelings of mankind—imperfect as it is
      from a variety of causes, as it exists in the government, the religion,
      and domestic habits. Those who do not nominally, yet actually, submit to
      the same power. The external features of their conduct, indeed, can no
      more escape it, than the clouds can escape from the stream of the wind;
      and his opinion, which he often hopes he has dispassionately secured from
      all contagion of prejudice and vulgarity, would be found, on examination,
      to be the inevitable excrescence of the very usages from which he
      vehemently dissents. Internally all is conducted otherwise; the
      efficiency, the essence, the vitality of actions, derives its colour from
      what is no ways contributed to from any external source. Like the plant
      which while it derives the accident of its size and shape from the soil in
      which it springs, and is cankered, or distorted, or inflated, yet retains
      those qualities which essentially divide it from all others; so that
      hemlock continues to be poison, and the violet does not cease to emit its
      odour in whatever soil it may grow.
    

      We consider our own nature too superficially. We look on all that in
      ourselves with which we can discover a resemblance in others; and consider
      those resemblances as the materials of moral knowledge. It is in the
      differences that it actually consists.
    

      [1815; publ. 1840]
    





 



</div></body></text></TEI>