<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Essays, Letters from Abroad, Translations and Fragments</title><author>Shelley, Percy Bysshe (1792-1822)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Edward Moxon</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1840</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="4">
      SPECULATIONS ON METAPHYSICS
    

      I—THE MIND
    

      It is an axiom in mental philosophy, that we can think of nothing which we
      have not perceived. When I say that we can think of nothing, I mean, we
      can imagine nothing, we can reason of nothing, we can remember nothing, we
      can foresee nothing. The most astonishing combinations of poetry, the
      subtlest deductions of logic and mathematics, are no other than
      combinations which the intellect makes of sensations according to its own
      laws. A catalogue of all the thoughts of the mind, and of all their
      possible modifications, is a cyclopedic history of the universe.
    

      But, it will be objected, the inhabitants of the various planets of this
      and other solar systems; and the existence of a Power bearing the same
      relation to all that we perceive and are, as what we call a cause does to
      what we call effect, were never subjects of sensation, and yet the laws of
      mind almost universally suggest, according to the various disposition of
      each, a conjecture, a persuasion, or a conviction of their existence. The
      reply is simple; these thoughts are also to be included in the catalogue
      of existence; they are modes in which thoughts are combined; the objection
      only adds force to the conclusion, that beyond the limits of perception
      and thought nothing can exist.
    

      Thoughts, or ideas, or notions, call them what you will, differ from each
      other, not in kind, but in force. It has commonly been supposed that those
      distinct thoughts which affect a number of persons, at regular intervals,
      during the passage of a multitude of other thoughts, which are called REAL
      or EXTERNAL OBJECTS, are totally different in kind from those which affect
      only a few persons, and which recur at irregular intervals, and are
      usually more obscure and indistinct, such as hallucinations, dreams, and
      the ideas of madness. No essential distinction between any one of these
      ideas, or any class of them, is founded on a correct observation of the
      nature of things, but merely on a consideration of what thoughts are most
      invariably subservient to the security and happiness of life; and if
      nothing more were expressed by the distinction, the philosopher might
      safely accommodate his language to that of the vulgar. But they pretend to
      assert an essential difference, which has no foundation in truth, and
      which suggests a narrow and false conception of universal nature, the
      parent of the most fatal errors in speculation. A specific difference
      between every thought of the mind, is, indeed, a necessary consequence of
      that law by which it perceives diversity and number; but a generic and
      essential difference is wholly arbitrary. The principle of the agreement
      and similarity of all thoughts, is, that they are all thoughts; the
      principle of their disagreement consists in the variety and irregularity
      of the occasions on which they arise in the mind. That in which they
      agree, to that in which they differ, is as everything to nothing.
      Important distinctions, of various degrees of force, indeed, are to be
      established between them, if they were, as they may be, subjects of
      ethical and economical discussion; but that is a question altogether
      distinct. By considering all knowledge as bounded by perception, whose
      operations may be indefinitely combined, we arrive at a conception of
      Nature inexpressibly more magnificent, simple and true, than accords with
      the ordinary systems of complicated and partial consideration. Nor does a
      contemplation of the universe, in this comprehensive and synthetical view,
      exclude the subtlest analysis of its modifications and parts.
    

      A scale might be formed, graduated according to the degrees of a combined
      ratio of intensity, duration, connexion, periods of recurrence, and
      utility, which would be the standard, according to which all ideas might
      be measured, and an uninterrupted chain of nicely shadowed distinctions
      would be observed, from the faintest impression on the senses, to the most
      distinct combination of those impressions; from the simplest of those
      combinations, to that mass of knowledge which, including our own nature,
      constitutes what we call the universe.
    

      We are intuitively conscious of our own existence, and of that connexion
      in the train of our successive ideas, which we term our identity. We are
      conscious also of the existence of other minds; but not intuitively. Our
      evidence, with respect to the existence of other minds, is founded upon a
      very complicated relation of ideas, which it is foreign to the purpose of
      this treatise to anatomize. The basis of this relation is, undoubtedly, a
      periodical recurrence of masses of ideas, which our voluntary
      determinations have, in one peculiar direction, no power to circumscribe
      or to arrest, and against the recurrence of which they can only
      imperfectly provide. The irresistible laws of thought constrain us to
      believe that the precise limits of our actual ideas are not the actual
      limits of possible ideas; the law, according to which these deductions are
      drawn, is called analogy; and this is the foundation of all our
      inferences, from one idea to another, inasmuch as they resemble each
      other.
    

      We see trees, houses, fields, living beings in our own shape, and in
      shapes more or less analogous to our own. These are perpetually changing
      the mode of their existence relatively to us. To express the varieties of
      these modes, we say, WE MOVE, THEY MOVE; and as this motion is continual,
      though not uniform, we express our conception of the diversities of its
      course by—IT HAS BEEN, IT IS, IT SHALL BE. These diversities are
      events or objects, and are essential, considered relatively to human
      identity, for the existence of the human mind. For if the inequalities,
      produced by what has been termed the operations of the external universe,
      were levelled by the perception of our being, uniting and filling up their
      interstices, motion and mensuration, and time, and space; the elements of
      the human mind being thus abstracted, sensation and imagination cease.
      Mind cannot be considered pure.
    

      II—WHAT METAPHYSICS ARE. ERRORS IN THE USUAL METHODS OF CONSIDERING
      THEM
    

      We do not attend sufficiently to what passes within ourselves. We combine
      words, combined a thousand times before. In our minds we assume entire
      opinions; and in the expression of those opinions, entire phrases, when we
      would philosophize. Our whole style of expression and sentiment is
      infected with the tritest plagiarisms. Our words are dead, our thoughts
      are cold and borrowed.
    

      Let us contemplate facts; let us, in the great study of ourselves,
      resolutely compel the mind to a rigid consideration of itself. We are not
      content with conjecture, and inductions, and syllogisms, in sciences
      regarding external objects. As in these, let us also, in considering the
      phenomena of mind, severely collect those facts which cannot be disputed.
      Metaphysics will thus possess this conspicuous advantage over every other
      science, that each student, by attentively referring to his own mind, may
      ascertain the authorities upon which any assertions regarding it are
      supported. There can thus be no deception, we ourselves being the
      depositaries of the evidence of the subject which we consider.
    

      Metaphysics may be defined as an inquiry concerning those things belonging
      to, or connected with, the internal nature of man.
    

      It is said that mind produces motion; and it might as well have been said,
      that motion produces mind.
    

      III—DIFFICULTY OF ANALYSING THE HUMAN MIND
    

      If it were possible that a person should give a faithful history of his
      being, from the earliest epochs of his recollection, a picture would be
      presented such as the world has never contemplated before. A mirror would
      be held up to all men in which they might behold their own recollections,
      and, in dim perspective, their shadowy hopes and fears,—all that
      they dare not, or that, daring and desiring, they could not expose to the
      open eyes of day. But thought can with difficulty visit the intricate and
      winding chambers which it inhabits. It is like a river whose rapid and
      perpetual stream flows outwards;—like one in dread who speeds
      through the recesses of some haunted pile, and dares not look behind. The
      caverns of the mind are obscure, and shadowy; or pervaded with a lustre,
      beautifully bright indeed, but shining not beyond their portals. If it
      were possible to be where we have been, vitally and indeed—if, at
      the moment of our presence there, we could define the results of our
      experience,—if the passage from sensation to reflection—from a
      state of passive perception to voluntary contemplation, were not so
      dizzying and so tumultuous, this attempt would be less difficult.
    

      IV—HOW THE ANALYSIS SHOULD BE CARRIED ON
    

      Most of the errors of philosophers have arisen from considering the human
      being in a point of view too detailed and circumscribed He is not a moral,
      and an intellectual,—but also, and pre-eminently, an imaginative
      being. His own mind is his law; his own mind is all things to him. If we
      would arrive at any knowledge which should be serviceable from the
      practical conclusions to which it leads, we ought to consider the mind of
      man and the universe as the great whole on which to exercise our
      speculations. Here, above all, verbal disputes ought to be laid aside,
      though this has long been their chosen field of battle. It imports little
      to inquire whether thought be distinct from the objects of thought. The
      use of the words EXTERNAL and INTERNAL, as applied to the establishment of
      this distinction, has been the symbol and the source of much dispute. This
      is merely an affair of words, and as the dispute deserves, to say, that
      when speaking of the objects of thought, we indeed only describe one of
      the forms of thought—or that, speaking of thought, we only apprehend
      one of the operations of the universal system of beings.
    

      V—CATALOGUE OF THE PHENOMENA OF DREAMS, AS CONNECTING SLEEPING AND
      WAKING
    

      1. Let us reflect on our infancy, and give as faithfully as possible a
      relation of the events of sleep.
    

      And first I am bound to present a faithful picture of my own peculiar
      nature relatively to sleep. I do not doubt that were every individual to
      imitate me, it would be found that among many circumstances peculiar to
      their individual nature, a sufficiently general resemblance would be found
      to prove the connexion existing between those peculiarities and the most
      universal phenomena. I shall employ caution, indeed, as to the facts which
      I state, that they contain nothing false or exaggerated. But they contain
      no more than certain elucidations of my own nature; concerning the degree
      in which it resembles, or differs from, that of others, I am by no means
      accurately aware. It is sufficient, however, to caution the reader against
      drawing general inferences from particular instances.
    

      I omit the general instances of delusion in fever or delirium, as well as
      mere dreams considered in themselves. A delineation of this subject,
      however inexhaustible and interesting, is to be passed over. What is the
      connexion of sleeping and of waking?
    

      2. I distinctly remember dreaming three several times, between intervals
      of two or more years, the same precise dream. It was not so much what is
      ordinarily called a dream; the single image, unconnected with all other
      images, of a youth who was educated at the same school with myself,
      presented itself in sleep. Even now, after the lapse of many years, I can
      never hear the name of this youth, without the three places where I
      dreamed of him presenting themselves distinctly to my mind.
    

      3. In dreams, images acquire associations peculiar to dreaming; so that
      the idea of a particular house, when it recurs a second time in dreams,
      will have relation with the idea of the same house, in the first time, of
      a nature entirely different from that which the house excites, when seen
      or thought of in relation to waking ideas.
    

      4. I have beheld scenes, with the intimate and unaccountable connexion of
      which with the obscure parts of my own nature, I have been irresistibly
      impressed. I have beheld a scene which has produced no unusual effect on
      my thoughts. After the lapse of many years I have dreamed of this scene.
      It has hung on my memory, it has haunted my thoughts, at intervals, with
      the pertinacity of an object connected with human affections. I have
      visited this scene again. Neither the dream could be dissociated from the
      landscape, nor the landscape from the dream, nor feelings, such as neither
      singly could have awakened, from both.
    

      But the most remarkable event of this nature, which ever occurred to me,
      happened five years ago at Oxford. I was walking with a friend, in the
      neighbourhood of that city, engaged in earnest and interesting
      conversation. We suddenly turned the corner of a lane, and the view, which
      its high banks and hedges had concealed, presented itself. The view
      consisted of a wind-mill, standing in one among many plashy meadows,
      inclosed with stone walls; the irregular and broken ground, between the
      wall and the road on which we stood; a long low hill behind the windmill,
      and a grey covering of uniform cloud spread over the evening sky. It was
      that season when the last leaf had just fallen from the scant and stunted
      ash. The scene surely was a common scene; the season and the hour little
      calculated to kindle lawless thought; it was a tame uninteresting
      assemblage of objects, such as would drive the imagination for refuge in
      serious and sober talk, to the evening fireside, and the dessert of winter
      fruits and wine. The effect which it produced on me was not such as could
      have been expected. I suddenly remembered to have seen that exact scene in
      some dream of long—. [Footnote: Here I was obliged to leave off,
      overcome by thrilling horror.]
    

      [1815; publ. 1840]
    





 



</div></body></text></TEI>