<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Essays, Letters from Abroad, Translations and Fragments</title><author>Shelley, Percy Bysshe (1792-1822)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Edward Moxon</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1840</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="3">
      ON THE PUNISHMENT OF DEATH
    

      A FRAGMENT
    

      The first law which it becomes a Reformer to propose and support, at the
      approach of a period of great political change, is the abolition of the
      punishment of death.
    

      It is sufficiently clear that revenge, retaliation, atonement, expiation,
      are rules and motives, so far from deserving a place in any enlightened
      system of political life, that they are the chief sources of a prodigious
      class of miseries in the domestic circles of society. It is clear that
      however the spirit of legislation may appear to frame institutions upon
      more philosophical maxims, it has hitherto, in those cases which are
      termed criminal, done little more than palliate the spirit, by gratifying
      a portion of it; and afforded a compromise between that which is bests—the
      inflicting of no evil upon a sensitive being, without a decisively
      beneficial result in which he should at least participates—and that
      which is worst; that he should be put to torture for the amusement of
      those whom he may have injured, or may seem to have injured.
    

      Omitting these remoter considerations, let us inquire what, DEATH is; that
      punishment which is applied as a measure of transgressions of indefinite
      shades of distinction, so soon as they shall have passed that degree and
      colour of enormity, with which it is supposed no, inferior infliction is
      commensurate.
    

      And first, whether death is good or evil, a punishment or a reward, or
      whether it be wholly indifferent, no man can take upon himself to assert.
      That that within us which thinks and feels, continues to think and feel
      after the dissolution of the body, has been the almost universal opinion
      of mankind, and the accurate philosophy of what I may be permitted to term
      the modern Academy, by showing the prodigious depth and extent of our
      ignorance respecting the causes and nature of sensation, renders probable
      the affirmative of a proposition, the negative of which it is so difficult
      to conceive, and the popular arguments against which, derived from what is
      called the atomic system, are proved to be applicable only to the relation
      which one object bears to another, as apprehended by the mind, and not to
      existence itself, or the nature of that essence which is the medium and
      receptacle of objects.
    

      The popular system of religion suggests the idea that the mind, after
      death, will be painfully or pleasurably affected according to its
      determinations during life. However ridiculous and pernicious we must
      admit the vulgar accessories of this creed to be, there is a certain
      analogy, not wholly absurd, between the consequences resulting to an
      individual during life from the virtuous or vicious, prudent or imprudent,
      conduct of his external actions, to those consequences which are
      conjectured to ensue from the discipline and order of his internal
      thoughts, as affecting his condition in a future state. They omit, indeed,
      to calculate upon the accidents of disease, and temperament, and
      organization, and circumstance, together with the multitude of independent
      agencies which affect the opinions, the conduct, and the happiness of
      individuals, and produce determinations of the will, and modify the
      judgement, so as to produce effects the most opposite in natures
      considerably similar. These are those operations in the order of the whole
      of nature, tending, we are prone to believe, to some definite mighty end,
      to which the agencies of our peculiar nature are subordinate; nor is there
      any reason to suppose, that in a future state they should become suddenly
      exempt from that subordination. The philosopher is unable to determine
      whether our existence in a previous state has affected our present
      condition, and abstains from deciding whether our present condition will
      affect us in that which may be future. That, if we continue to exist, the
      manner of our existence will be such as no inferences nor conjectures,
      afforded by a consideration of our earthly experience, can elucidate, is
      sufficiently obvious. The opinion that the vital principle within us, in
      whatever mode it may continue to exist, must lose that consciousness of
      definite and individual being which now characterizes it, and become a
      unit in the vast sum of action and of thought which disposes and animates
      the universe, and is called God, seems to belong to that class of opinion
      which has been designated as indifferent.
    

      To compel a person to know all that can be known by the dead concerning
      that which the living fear, hope, or forget; to plunge him into the
      pleasure or pain which there awaits him; to punish or reward him in a
      manner and in a degree incalculable and incomprehensible by us; to disrobe
      him at once from all that intertexture of good and evil with which Nature
      seems to have clothed every form of individual existence, is to inflict on
      him the doom of death.
    

      A certain degree of pain and terror usually accompany the infliction of
      death. This degree is infinitely varied by the infinite variety in the
      temperament and opinions of the sufferers. As a measure of punishment,
      strictly so considered, and as an exhibition, which, by its known effects
      on the sensibility of the sufferer, is intended to intimidate the
      spectators from incurring a similar liability, it is singularly
      inadequate.
    

      Firstly, Persons of energetic character, in whom, as in men who suffer for
      political crimes, there is a large mixture of enterprise, and fortitude,
      and disinterestedness, and the elements, though misguided and disarranged,
      by which the strength and happiness of a nation might have been cemented,
      die in such a manner, as to make death appear not evil, but good. The
      death of what is called a traitor, that is, a person who, from whatever
      motive, would abolish the government of the day, is as often a triumphant
      exhibition of suffering virtue, as the warning of a culprit. The
      multitude, instead of departing with a panic-stricken approbation of the
      laws which exhibited such a spectacle, are inspired with pity, admiration
      and sympathy; and the most generous among them feel an emulation to be the
      authors of such flattering emotions, as they experience stirring in their
      bosoms. Impressed by what they see and feel, they make no distinctive
      between the motives which incited the criminals to the action for which
      they suffer, or the heroic courage with which they turned into good that
      which their judges awarded to them as evil or the purpose itself of those
      actions, though that purpose may happen to be eminently pernicious. The
      laws in this case lose their sympathy, which it ought to be their chief
      object to secure, and in a participation of which consists their chief
      strength in maintaining those sanctions by which the parts of the social
      union are bound together, so as to produce, as nearly as possible, the
      ends for which it is instituted.
    

      Secondly,—Persons of energetic character, in communities not
      modelled with philosophical skill to turn all the energies which they
      contain to the purposes of common good, are prone also to fall into the
      temptation of undertaking, and are peculiarly fitted for despising the
      perils attendant upon consummating, the most enormous crimes. Murder,
      rapes, extensive schemes of plunder are the actions of persons belonging
      to this class; and death is the penalty of conviction. But the coarseness
      of organization, peculiar to men capable of committing acts wholly
      selfish, is usually found to be associated with a proportionate
      insensibility to fear or pain. Their sufferings communicate to those of
      the spectators, who may be liable to the commission of similar crimes a
      sense of the lightness of that event, when closely examined which, at a
      distance, as uneducated persons are accustomed to do, probably they
      regarded with horror. But a great majority of the spectators are so bound
      up in the interests and the habits of social union that no temptation
      would be sufficiently strong to induce them to a commission of the
      enormities to which this penalty is assigned. The more powerful, and the
      richer among them,—and a numerous class of little tradesmen are
      richer and more powerful than those who are employed by them, and the
      employer, in general, bears this relation to the employed,—regard
      their own wrongs as, in some degree, avenged, and their own rights secured
      by this punishment, inflicted as the penalty of whatever crime. In cases
      of murder or mutilation, this feeling is almost universal. In those,
      therefore, whom this exhibition does not awaken to the sympathy which
      extenuates crime and discredits the law which restrains it, it produces
      feelings more directly at war with the genuine purposes of political
      society. It excites those emotions which it is the chief object of
      civilization to extinguish for ever, and in the extinction of which alone
      there can be any hope of better institutions than those under which men
      now misgovern one another. Men feel that their revenge is gratified, and
      that their security is established by the extinction and the sufferings of
      beings, in most respects resembling themselves; and their daily
      occupations constraining them to a precise form in all their thoughts,
      they come to connect inseparably the idea of their own advantage with that
      of the death and torture of others. It is manifest that the object of sane
      polity is directly the reverse; and that laws founded upon reason, should
      accustom the gross vulgar to associate their ideas of security and of
      interest with the reformation, and the strict restraint, for that purpose
      alone, of those who might invade it.
    

      The passion of revenge is originally nothing more than an habitual
      perception of the ideas of the sufferings of the person who inflicts an
      injury, as connected, as they are in a savage state, or in such portions
      of society as are yet undisciplined to civilization, with security that
      that injury will not be repeated in future. This feeling, engrafted upon
      superstition and confirmed by habit, at last loses sight of the only
      object for which it may be supposed to have been implanted, and becomes a
      passion and a duty to be pursued and fulfilled, even to the destruction of
      those ends to which it originally tended. The other passions, both good
      and evil. Avarice, Remorse, Love, Patriotism, present a similar
      appearance; and to this principle of the mind over-shooting the mark at
      which it aims, we owe all that is eminently base or excellent in human
      nature; in providing for the nutriment or the extinction of which,
      consists the true art of the legislator. [Footnote: The savage and the
      illiterate are but faintly aware of the distinction between the future and
      the past; they make actions belonging to periods so distinct, the subjects
      of similar feelings; they live only in the present, or in the past, as it
      is present. It is in this that the philosopher excels one of the many; it
      is this which distinguishes the doctrine of philosophic necessity from
      fatalism; and that determination of the will, by which it is the active
      source of future events, from that liberty or indifference, to which the
      abstract liability of irremediable actions is attached, according to the
      notions of the vulgar.
    

      This is the source of the erroneous excesses of Remorse and Revenge; the
      one extending itself over the future, and the other over the past;
      provinces in which their suggestions can only be the sources of evil. The
      purpose of a resolution to act more wisely and virtuously in future, and
      the sense of a necessity of caution in repressing an enemy, are the
      sources from which the enormous superstitions implied in the words cited
      have arisen.]
    

      Nothing is more clear than that the infliction of punishment in general,
      in a degree which the reformation and the restraint of those who
      transgress the laws does not render indispensable, and none more than
      death, confirms all the inhuman and unsocial impulses of men. It is almost
      a proverbial remark, that those nations in which the penal code has been
      particularly mild, have been distinguished from all others by the rarity
      of crime. But the example is to be admitted to be equivocal. A more
      decisive argument is afforded by a consideration of the universal
      connexion of ferocity of manners, and a contempt of social ties, with the
      contempt of human life. Governments which derive their institutions from
      the existence of circumstances of barbarism and violence, with some rare
      exceptions perhaps, are bloody in proportion as they are despotic, and
      form the manners of their subjects to a sympathy with their own spirit.
    

      The spectators who feel no abhorrence at a public execution, but rather a
      self-applauding superiority, and a sense of gratified indignation, are
      surely excited to the most inauspicious emotions. The first reflection of
      such a one is the sense of his own internal and actual worth, as
      preferable to that of the victim, whom circumstances have led to
      destruction. The meanest wretch is impressed with a sense of his own
      comparative merit. He is one of those on whom the tower of Siloam fell not—he
      is such a one as Jesus Christ found not in all Samaria, who, in his own
      soul, throws the first stone at the woman taken in adultery. The popular
      religion of the country takes its designation from that illustrious person
      whose beautiful sentiment I have quoted. Any one who has stript from the
      doctrines of this person the veil of familiarity, will perceive how
      adverse their spirit is to feelings of this nature.
    





 



</div></body></text></TEI>