<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Essays, Letters from Abroad, Translations and Fragments</title><author>Shelley, Percy Bysshe (1792-1822)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Edward Moxon</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1840</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="1">
      ON LOVE
    

      What is love? Ask him who lives, what is life? ask him who adores, what is
      God?
    

      I know not the internal constitution of other men, nor even thine, whom I
      now address. I see that in some external attributes they resemble me, but
      when, misled by that appearance, I have thought to appeal to something in
      common, and unburthen my inmost soul to them, I have found my language
      misunderstood, like one in a distant and savage land. The more
      opportunities they have afforded me for experience, the wider has appeared
      the interval between us, and to a greater distance have the points of
      sympathy been withdrawn. With a spirit ill fitted to sustain such proof,
      trembling and feeble through its tenderness, I have everywhere sought
      sympathy and have found only repulse and disappointment.
    

      Thou demandest what is love? It is that powerful attraction towards all
      that we conceive, or fear, or hope beyond ourselves, when we find within
      our own thoughts the chasm of an insufficient void, and seek to awaken in
      all things that are, a community with what we experience within ourselves.
      If we reason, we would be understood; if we imagine, we would that the
      airy children of our brain were born anew within another's; if we feel, we
      would that another's nerves should vibrate to our own, that the beams of
      their eyes should kindle at once and mix and melt into our own, that lips
      of motionless ice should not reply to lips quivering and burning with the
      heart's best blood. This is Love. This is the bond and the sanction which
      connects not only man with man, but with everything which exists. We are
      born into the world, and there is something within us which, from the
      instant that we live, more and more thirsts after its likeness. It is
      probably in correspondence with this law that the infant drains milk from
      the bosom of its mother; this propensity develops itself with the
      development of our nature. We dimly see within our intellectual nature a
      miniature as it were of our entire self, yet deprived of all that we
      condemn or despise, the ideal prototype of everything excellent or lovely
      that we are capable of conceiving as belonging to the nature of man. Not
      only the portrait of our external being, but an assemblage of the minutest
      particles of which our nature is composed;[Footnote: These words are
      ineffectual and metaphorical. Most words are so—No help!] a mirror
      whose surface reflects only the forms of purity and brightness; a soul
      within our soul that describes a circle around its proper paradise, which
      pain, and sorrow, and evil dare not overleap. To this we eagerly refer all
      sensations, thirsting that they should resemble or correspond with it. The
      discovery of its antitype; the meeting with an understanding capable of
      clearly estimating our own; an imagination which should enter into and
      seize upon the subtle and delicate peculiarities which we have delighted
      to cherish and unfold in secret; with a frame whose nerves, like the
      chords of two exquisite lyres, strung to the accompaniment of one
      delightful voice, vibrate with the vibrations of our own; and of a
      combination of all these in such proportion as the type within demands;
      this is the invisible and unattainable point to which Love tends; and to
      attain which, it urges forth the powers of man to arrest the faintest
      shadow of that, without the possession of which there is no rest nor
      respite to the heart over which it rules. Hence in solitude, or in that
      deserted state when we are surrounded by human beings, and yet they
      sympathize not with us, we love the flowers, the grass, and the waters,
      and the sky. In the motion of the very leaves of spring, in the blue air,
      there is then found a secret correspondence with our heart. There is
      eloquence in the tongueless wind, and a melody in the flowing brooks and
      the rustling of the reeds beside them, which by their inconceivable
      relation to something within the soul, awaken the spirits to a dance of
      breathless rapture, and bring tears of mysterious tenderness to the eyes,
      like the enthusiasm of patriotic success, or the voice of one beloved
      singing to you alone. Sterne says that, if he were in a desert, he would
      love some cypress. So soon as this want or power is dead, man becomes the
      living sepulchre of himself, and what yet survives is the mere husk of
      what once he was.
    

      [1815; publ. 1840]
    

      ON LIFE
    

      Life and the world, or whatever we call that which we are and feel, is an
      astonishing thing. The mist of familiarity obscures from us the wonder of
      our being. We are struck with admiration at some of its transient
      modifications, but it is itself the great miracle. What are changes of
      empires, the wreck of dynasties, with the opinions which supported them;
      what is the birth and the extinction of religious and of political systems
      to life? What are the revolutions of the globe which we inhabit, and the
      operations of the elements of which it is composed, compared with life?
      What is the universe of stars, and suns, of which this inhabited earth is
      one, and their motions, and their destiny, compared with life? Life, the
      great miracle, we admire not, because it is so miraculous. It is well that
      we are thus shielded by the familiarity of what is at once so certain and
      so unfathomable, from an astonishment which would otherwise absorb and
      overawe the functions of that which is its object.
    

      If any artist, I do not say had executed, but had merely conceived in his
      mind the system of the sun, and the stars, and planets, they not existing,
      and had painted to us in words, or upon canvas, the spectacle now afforded
      by the nightly cope of heaven, and illustrated it by the wisdom of
      astronomy, great would be our admiration. Or had he imagined the scenery
      of this earth, the mountains, the seas, and the rivers; the grass, and the
      flowers, and the variety of the forms and masses of the leaves of the
      woods, and the colours which attend the setting and the rising sun, and
      the hues of the atmosphere, turbid or serene, these things not before
      existing, truly we should have been astonished, and it would not have been
      a vain boast to have said of such a man, 'Non merita nome di creatore, se
      non Iddio ed il Poeta.' But now these things are looked on with little
      wonder, and to be conscious of them with intense delight is esteemed to be
      the distinguishing mark of a refined and extraordinary person. The
      multitude of men care not for them. It is thus with Life—that which
      includes all.
    

      What is life? Thoughts and feelings arise, with or without our will, and
      we employ words to express them. We are born, and our birth is
      unremembered, and our infancy remembered but in fragments; we live on, and
      in living we lose the apprehension of life. How vain is it to think that
      words can penetrate the mystery of our being! Rightly used they may make
      evident our ignorance to ourselves, and this is much. For what are we?
      Whence do we come? and whither do we go? Is birth the commencement, is
      death the conclusion of our being? What is birth and death?
    

      The most refined abstractions of logic conduct to a view of life, which,
      though startling to the apprehension, is, in fact, that which the habitual
      sense of its repeated combinations has extinguished in us. It strips, as
      it were, the painted curtain from this scene of things. I confess that I
      am one of those who are unable to refuse my assent to the conclusions of
      those philosophers who assert that nothing exists but as it is perceived.
    

      It is a decision against which all our persuasions struggle, and we must
      be long convicted before we can be convinced that the solid universe of
      external things is 'such stuff as dreams are made of.' The shocking
      absurdities of the popular philosophy of mind and matter, its fatal
      consequences in morals, and their violent dogmatism concerning the source
      of all things, had early conducted me to materialism. This materialism is
      a seducing system to young and superficial minds. It allows its disciples
      to talk, and dispenses them from thinking. But I was discontented with
      such a view of things as it afforded; man is a being of high aspirations,
      'looking both before and after,' whose 'thoughts wander through eternity,'
      disclaiming alliance with transience and decay; incapable of imagining to
      himself annihilation; existing but in the future and the past; being, not
      what he is, but what he has been and shall be. Whatever may be his true
      and final destination, there is a spirit within him at enmity with
      nothingness and dissolution. This is the character of all life and being.
      Each is at once the centre and the circumference; the point to which all
      things are referred, and the line in which all things are contained. Such
      contemplations as these, materialism and the popular philosophy of mind
      and matter alike forbid; they are only consistent with the intellectual
      system.
    

      It is absurd to enter into a long recapitulation of arguments sufficiently
      familiar to those inquiring minds, whom alone a writer on abstruse
      subjects can be conceived to address. Perhaps the most clear and vigorous
      statement of the intellectual system is to be found in Sir William
      Drummond's Academical Questions.
    

      After such an exposition, it would be idle to translate into other words
      what could only lose its energy and fitness by the change. Examined point
      by point, and word by word, the most discriminating intellects have been
      able to discern no train of thoughts in the process of reasoning, which
      does not conduct inevitably to the conclusion which has been stated.
    

      What follows from the admission? It establishes no new truth, it gives us
      no additional insight into our hidden nature, neither its action nor
      itself. Philosophy, impatient as it may be to build, has much work yet
      remaining, as pioneer for the overgrowth of ages. It makes one step
      towards this object; it destroys error, and the roots of error. It leaves,
      what it is too often the duty of the reformer in political and ethical
      questions to leave, a vacancy. It reduces the mind to that freedom in
      which it would have acted, but for the misuse of words and signs, the
      instruments of its own creation. By signs, I would be understood in a wide
      sense, including what is properly meant by that term, and what I
      peculiarly mean. In this latter sense, almost all familiar objects are
      signs, standing, not for themselves, but for others, in their capacity of
      suggesting one thought which shall lead to a train of thoughts. Our whole
      life is thus an education of error.
    

      Let us recollect our sensations as children. What a distinct and intense
      apprehension had we of the world and of ourselves! Many of the
      circumstances of social life were then important to us which are now no
      longer so. But that is not the point of comparison on which I mean to
      insist. We less habitually distinguished all that we saw and felt, from
      ourselves. They seemed as it were to constitute one mass. There are some
      persons who, in this respect, are always children. Those who are subject
      to the state called reverie, feel as if their nature were dissolved into
      the surrounding universe, or as if the surrounding universe were absorbed
      into their being. They are conscious of no distinction. And these are
      states which precede, or accompany, or follow an unusually intense and
      vivid apprehension of life. As men grow up this power commonly decays, and
      they become mechanical and habitual agents. Thus feelings and then
      reasonings are the combined result of a multitude of entangled thoughts,
      and of a series of what are called impressions, planted by reiteration.
    

      The view of life presented by the most refined deductions of the
      intellectual philosophy, is that of unity. Nothing exists but as it is
      perceived. The difference is merely nominal between those two classes of
      thought, which are vulgarly distinguished by the names of ideas and of
      external objects. Pursuing the same thread of reasoning, the existence of
      distinct individual minds, similar to that which is employed in now
      questioning its own nature, is likewise found to be a delusion. The words
      I, YOU, THEY, are not signs of any actual difference subsisting
      between the assemblage of thoughts thus indicated, but are merely marks
      employed to denote the different modifications of the one mind.
    

      Let it not be supposed that this doctrine conducts to the monstrous
      presumption that I, the person who now write and think, am that one mind.
      I am but a portion of it. The words I, and YOU, and THEY, are
      grammatical devices invented simply for arrangement, and totally devoid of
      the intense and exclusive sense usually attached to them. It is difficult
      to find terms adequate to express so subtle a conception as that to which
      the Intellectual Philosophy has conducted us. We are on that verge where
      words abandon us, and what wonder if we grow dizzy to look down the dark
      abyss of how little we know. The relations of THINGS remain unchanged, by
      whatever system. By the word THINGS is to be understood any object of
      thought, that is any thought upon which any other thought is employed,
      with an apprehension of distinction.
    

      The relations of these remain unchanged; and such is the material of our
      knowledge. What is the cause of life? that is, how was it produced, or
      what agencies distinct from life have acted or act upon life? All recorded
      generations of mankind have weariedly busied themselves in inventing
      answers to this question; and the result has been,—Religion. Yet,
      that the basis of all things cannot be, as the popular philosophy alleges,
      mind, is sufficiently evident. Mind, as far as we have any experience of
      its properties, and beyond that experience how vain is argument! cannot
      create, it can only perceive. It is said also to be the cause. But cause
      is only a word expressing a certain state of the human mind with regard to
      the manner in which two thoughts are apprehended to be related to each
      other. If any one desires to know how unsatisfactorily the popular
      philosophy employs itself upon this great question, they need only
      impartially reflect upon the manner in which thoughts develop themselves
      in their minds. It is infinitely improbable that the cause of mind, that
      is, of existence, is similar to mind.
    

      [1815; publ. 1840]
    





 



</div></body></text></TEI>