<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Essays, Letters from Abroad, Translations and Fragments</title><author>Shelley, Percy Bysshe (1792-1822)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Edward Moxon</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1840</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="6">
      CHAPTER I ON THE NATURE OF VIRTUE
    

      SECT. 1. General View of the Nature and Objects of Virtue.—2. The
      Origin and Basis of Virtue, as founded on the Elementary Principles of
      Mind.—3. The Laws which flow from the nature of Mind regulating the
      application of those principles to human actions;—4. Virtue, a
      possible attribute of man.
    

      We exist in the midst of a multitude of beings like ourselves, upon whose
      happiness most of our actions exert some obvious and decisive influence.
    

      The regulation of this influence is the object of moral science. We know
      that we are susceptible of receiving painful or pleasurable impressions of
      greater or less intensity and duration. That is called good which produces
      pleasure; that is called evil which produces pain. These are general
      names, applicable to every class of causes, from which an overbalance of
      pain or pleasure may result. But when a human being is the active
      instrument of generating or diffusing happiness, the principle through
      which it is most effectually instrumental to that purpose, is called
      virtue. And benevolence, or the desire to be the author of good, united
      with justice, or an apprehension of the manner in which that good is to be
      done, constitutes virtue.
    

      But wherefore should a man be benevolent and just? The immediate emotions
      of his nature, especially in its most inartificial state, prompt him to
      inflict pain, and to arrogate dominion. He desires to heap superfluities
      to his own store, although others perish with famine. He is propelled to
      guard against the smallest invasion of his own liberty, though he reduces
      others to a condition of the most pitiless servitude. He is revengeful,
      proud and selfish. Wherefore should he curb these propensities?
    

      It is inquired, for what reason a human being should engage in procuring
      the happiness, or refrain from producing the pain of another? When a
      reason is required to prove the necessity of adopting any system of
      conduct, what is it that the objector demands? He requires proof of that
      system of conduct being such as will most effectually promote the
      happiness of mankind. To demonstrate this, is to render a moral reason.
      Such is the object of virtue.
    

      A common sophism, which, like many others, depends on the abuse of a
      metaphorical expression to a literal purpose, has produced much of the
      confusion which has involved the theory of morals. It is said that no
      person is bound to be just or kind, if, on his neglect, he should fail to
      incur some penalty. Duty is obligation. There can be no obligation without
      an obliger. Virtue is a law, to which it is the will of the lawgiver that
      we should conform; which will we should in no manner be bound to obey,
      unless some dreadful punishment were attached to disobedience. This is the
      philosophy of slavery and superstition.
    

      In fact, no person can be BOUND or OBLIGED, without some power preceding
      to bind and oblige. If I observe a man bound hand and foot, I know that
      some one bound him. But if I observe him returning self-satisfied from the
      performance of some action, by which he has been the willing author of
      extensive benefit, I do not infer that the anticipation of hellish
      agonies, or the hope of heavenly reward, has constrained him to such an
      act.
    

       .      .      .      .      .       .       .


      It remains to be stated in what manner the sensations which constitute the
      basis of virtue originate in the human mind; what are the laws which it
      receives there; how far the principles of mind allow it to be an attribute
      of a human being; and, lastly, what is the probability of persuading
      mankind to adopt it as a universal and systematic motive of conduct.
    

      BENEVOLENCE
    

      There is a class of emotions which we instinctively avoid. A human being,
      such as is man considered in his origin, a child a month old, has a very
      imperfect consciousness of the existence of other natures resembling
      itself. All the energies of its being are directed to the extinction of
      the pains with which it is perpetually assailed. At length it discovers
      that it is surrounded by natures susceptible of sensations similar to its
      own. It is very late before children attain to this knowledge. If a child
      observes, without emotion, its nurse or its mother suffering acute pain,
      it is attributable rather to ignorance than insensibility. So soon as the
      accents and gestures, significant of pain, are referred to the feelings
      which they express, they awaken in the mind of the beholder a desire that
      they should cease. Pain is thus apprehended to be evil for its own sake,
      without any other necessary reference to the mind by which its existence
      is perceived, than such as is indispensable to its perception. The
      tendencies of our original sensations, indeed, all have for their object
      the preservation of our individual being. But these are passive and
      unconscious. In proportion as the mind acquires an active power, the
      empire of these tendencies becomes limited. Thus an infant, a savage, and
      a solitary beast, is selfish, because its mind is incapable of receiving
      an accurate intimation of the nature of pain as existing in beings
      resembling itself. The inhabitant of a highly civilized community will
      more acutely sympathize with the sufferings and enjoyments of others, than
      the inhabitant of a society of a less degree of civilization. He who shall
      have cultivated his intellectual powers by familiarity with the highest
      specimens of poetry and philosophy, will usually sympathize more than one
      engaged in the less refined functions of manual labour. Every one has
      experience of the fact, that to sympathize with the sufferings of another,
      is to enjoy a transitory oblivion of his own.
    

      The mind thus acquires, by exercise, a habit, as it were, of perceiving
      and abhorring evil, however remote from the immediate sphere of sensations
      with which that individual mind is conversant. Imagination or mind
      employed in prophetically imaging forth its objects, is that faculty of
      human nature on which every gradation of its progress, nay, every, the
      minutest, change, depends. Pain or pleasure, if subtly analysed, will be
      found to consist entirely in prospect. The only distinction between the
      selfish man and the virtuous man is, that the imagination of the former is
      confined within a narrow limit, whilst that of the latter embraces a
      comprehensive circumference. In this sense, wisdom and virtue may be said
      to be inseparable, and criteria of each other. Selfishness is the
      offspring of ignorance and mistake; it is the portion of unreflecting
      infancy, and savage solitude, or of those whom toil or evil occupations
      have blunted or rendered torpid; disinterested benevolence is the product
      of a cultivated imagination, and has an intimate connexion with all the
      arts which add ornament, or dignity, or power, or stability to the social
      state of man. Virtue is thus entirely a refinement of civilized life; a
      creation of the human mind; or, rather, a combination which it has made,
      according to elementary rules contained within itself, of the feelings
      suggested by the relations established between man and man.
    

      All the theories which have refined and exalted humanity, or those which
      have been devised as alleviations of its mistakes and evils, have been
      based upon the elementary emotions of disinterestedness, which we feel to
      constitute the majesty of our nature. Patriotism, as it existed in the
      ancient republics, was never, as has been supposed, a calculation of
      personal advantages. When Mutius Scaevola thrust his hand into the burning
      coals, and Regulus returned to Carthage, and Epicharis sustained the rack
      silently, in the torments of which she knew that she would speedily
      perish, rather than betray the conspirators to the tyrant [Footnote:
      Tacitus.]; these illustrious persons certainly made a small estimate of
      their private interest. If it be said that they sought posthumous fame;
      instances are not wanting in history which prove that men have even defied
      infamy for the sake of good. But there is a great error in the world with
      respect to the selfishness of fame. It is certainly possible that a person
      should seek distinction as a medium of personal gratification. But the
      love of fame is frequently no more than a desire that the feelings of
      others should confirm, illustrate, and sympathize with, our own. In this
      respect it is allied with all that draws us out of ourselves. It is the
      'last infirmity of noble minds'. Chivalry was likewise founded on the
      theory of self-sacrifice. Love possesses so extraordinary a power over the
      human heart, only because disinterestedness is united with the natural
      propensities. These propensities themselves are comparatively impotent in
      cases where the imagination of pleasure to be given, as well as to be
      received, does not enter into the account. Let it not be objected that
      patriotism, and chivalry, and sentimental love, have been the fountains of
      enormous mischief. They are cited only to establish the proposition that,
      according to the elementary principles of mind, man is capable of desiring
      and pursuing good for its own sake.
    

      JUSTICE
    

      The benevolent propensities are thus inherent in the human mind. We are
      impelled to seek the happiness of others. We experience a satisfaction in
      being the authors of that happiness. Everything that lives is open to
      impressions or pleasure and pain. We are led by our benevolent
      propensities to regard every human being indifferently with whom we come
      in contact. They have preference only with respect to those who offer
      themselves most obviously to our notice. Human beings are indiscriminating
      and blind; they will avoid inflicting pain, though that pain should be
      attended with eventual benefit; they will seek to confer pleasure without
      calculating the mischief that may result. They benefit one at the expense
      of many.
    

      There is a sentiment in the human mind that regulates benevolence in its
      application as a principle of action. This is the sense of justice.
      Justice, as well as benevolence, is an elementary law of human nature. It
      is through this principle that men are impelled to distribute any means of
      pleasure which benevolence may suggest the communication of to others, in
      equal portions among an equal number of applicants. If ten men are
      shipwrecked on a desert island, they distribute whatever subsistence may
      remain to them, into equal portions among themselves. If six of them
      conspire to deprive the remaining four of their share, their conduct is
      termed unjust.
    

      The existence of pain has been shown to be a circumstance which the human
      mind regards with dissatisfaction, and of which it desires the cessation.
      It is equally according to its nature to desire that the advantages to be
      enjoyed by a limited number of persons should be enjoyed equally by all.
      This proposition is supported by the evidence of indisputable facts. Tell
      some ungarbled tale of a number of persons being made the victims of the
      enjoyments of one, and he who would appeal in favour of any system which
      might produce such an evil to the primary emotions of our nature, would
      have nothing to reply. Let two persons, equally strangers, make
      application for some benefit in the possession of a third to bestow, and
      to which he feels that they have an equal claim. They are both sensitive
      beings; pleasure and pain affect them alike.
    





 



</div></body></text></TEI>