<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Essays, Letters from Abroad, Translations and Fragments</title><author>Shelley, Percy Bysshe (1792-1822)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Edward Moxon</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1840</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="section" n="8">
      ESSAY ON THE LITERATURE, THE ARTS, AND THE MANNERS OF THE ATHENIANS
    

      A FRAGMENT
    

      The period which intervened between the birth of Pericles and the death of
      Aristotle, is undoubtedly, whether considered in itself, or with reference
      to the effects which it has produced upon the subsequent destinies of
      civilized man, the most memorable in the history of the world. What was
      the combination of moral and political circumstances which produced so
      unparalleled a progress during that period in literature and the arts;—why
      that progress, so rapid and so sustained, so soon received a check, and
      became retrograde,—are problems left to the wonder and conjecture of
      posterity. The wrecks and fragments of those subtle and profound minds,
      like the ruins of a fine statue, obscurely suggest to us the grandeur and
      perfection of the whole. Their very language—a type of the
      understandings of which it was the creation and the image—in
      variety, in simplicity, in flexibility, and in copiousness, excels every
      other language of the western world. Their sculptures are such as we, in
      our presumption, assume to be the models of ideal truth and beauty, and to
      which no artist of modern times can produce forms in any degree
      comparable. Their paintings, according to Pliny and Pausanias, were full
      of delicacy and harmony; and some even were powerfully pathetic, so as to
      awaken, like tender music or tragic poetry, the most overwhelming
      emotions. We are accustomed to conceive the painters of the sixteenth
      century, as those who have brought their art to the highest perfection,
      probably because none of the ancient paintings have been preserved. For
      all the inventive arts maintain, as it were, a sympathetic connexion
      between each other, being no more than various expressions of one internal
      power, modified by different circumstances, either of an individual, or of
      society; and the paintings of that period would probably bear the same
      relation as is confessedly borne by the sculptures to all succeeding ones.
      Of their music we know little; but the effects which it is said to have
      produced, whether they be attributed to the skill of the composer, or the
      sensibility of his audience, are far more powerful than any which we
      experience from the music of our own times; and if, indeed, the melody of
      their compositions were more tender and delicate, and inspiring, than the
      melodies of some modern European nations, their superiority in this art
      must have been something wonderful, and wholly beyond conception.
    

      Their poetry seems to maintain a very high, though not so disproportionate
      a rank, in the comparison. Perhaps Shakespeare, from the variety and
      comprehension of his genius, is to be considered, on the whole, as the
      greatest individual mind, of which we have specimens remaining. Perhaps
      Dante created imaginations of greater loveliness and energy than any that
      are to be found in the ancient literature of Greece. Perhaps nothing has
      been discovered in the fragments of the Greek lyric poets equivalent to
      the sublime and chivalric sensibility of Petrarch.—But, as a poet.
      Homer must be acknowledged to excel Shakespeare in the truth, the harmony,
      the sustained grandeur, the satisfying completeness of his images, their
      exact fitness to the illustration, and to that to which they belong. Nor
      could Dante, deficient in conduct, plan, nature, variety, and temperance,
      have been brought into comparison with these men, but for those fortunate
      isles laden with golden fruit, which alone could tempt any one to embark
      in the misty ocean of his dark and extravagant fiction.
    

      But, omitting the comparison of individual minds, which can afford no
      general inference, how superior was the spirit and system of their poetry
      to that of any other period! So that had any other genius equal in other
      respects to the greatest that ever enlightened the world, arisen in that
      age, he would have been superior to all, from this circumstance alone—that
      had conceptions would have assumed a more harmonious and perfect form. For
      it is worthy of observation, that whatever the poet of that age produced
      is as harmonious and perfect as possible. In a drama, for instance, were
      the composition of a person of inferior talent, it was still homogeneous
      and free from inequalities it was a whole, consistent with itself. The
      compositions of great minds bore throughout the sustained stamp of their
      greatness. In the poetry of succeeding ages the expectations are often
      exalted on Icarian wings, and fall, too much disappointed to give a memory
      and a name to the oblivious pool in which they fell.
    

      In physical knowledge Aristotle and Theophrastus had already—no
      doubt assisted by the labours of those of their predecessor whom they
      criticize—made advances worthy of the maturity of science. The
      astonishing invention of geometry, that series of discoveries which have
      enabled man to command the element and foresee future events, before the
      subjects of his ignorant wonder, and which have opened as it were the
      doors of the mysteries of nature, had already been brought to great
      perfection. Metaphysics, the science of man's intimate nature, and logic,
      or the grammar and elementary principles of that science received from the
      latter philosophers of the Periclean age a firm basis. All our more exact
      philosophy is built upon the labours of these great men, and many of the
      words which we employ in metaphysical distinctions were invented by them
      to give accuracy and system to their reasonings. The science of morals, or
      the voluntary conduct of men in relation to themselves or others, dates
      from this epoch. How inexpressibly bolder and more pure were the doctrines
      of those great men, in comparison with the timid maxims which prevail in
      the writings of the most esteemed modern moralists! They were such as
      Phocion, and Epaminondas, and Timoleon, who formed themselves on their
      influence, were to the wretched heroes of our own age.
    

      Their political and religious institutions are more difficult to bring
      into comparison with those of other times. A summary idea may be formed of
      the worth of any political and religious system, by observing the
      comparative degree of happiness and of intellect produced under its
      influence. And whilst many institution and opinions, which in ancient
      Greece were obstacles to the improvement of the human race, have been
      abolished among modern nations, how many pernicious superstitions and new
      contrivances of misrule, and unheard-of complications of public mischief,
      have not been invented among them by the ever-watchful spirit of avarice
      and tyranny!
    

      The modern nations of the civilized world owe the progress which they have
      made—as well in those physical sciences in which they have already
      excelled their masters, as in the moral and intellectual inquiries, in
      which, with all the advantage of the experience of the latter, it can
      scarcely be said that they have yet equalled them,—to what is called
      the revival of learning; that is, the study of the writers of the age
      which preceded and immediately followed the government of Pericles, or of
      subsequent writers, who were, so to speak, the rivers flowing from those
      immortal fountains. And though there seems to be a principle in the modern
      world, which, should circumstances analogous to those which modelled the
      intellectual resources of the age to which we refer, into so harmonious a
      proportion, again arise, would arrest and perpetuate them, and consign
      their results to a more equal, extensive, and lasting improvement of the
      condition of man—though justice and the true meaning of human
      society are, if not more accurately, more generally understood; though
      perhaps men know more, and therefore are more, as a mass, yet this
      principle has never been called into action, and requires indeed a
      universal and an almost appalling change in the system of existing things.
      The study of modern history is the study of kings, financiers, statesmen,
      and priests. The history of ancient Greece is the study of legislators,
      philosophers, and poets; it is the history of men, compared with the
      history of titles. What the Greeks were, was a reality, not a promise. And
      what we are and hope to be, is derived, as it were, from the influence and
      inspiration of these glorious generations.
    

      Whatever tends to afford a further illustration of the manners and
      opinions of those to whom we owe so much, and who were perhaps, on the
      whole, the most perfect specimens of humanity of whom we have authentic
      record, were infinitely valuable. Let us see their errors, their
      weaknesses, their daily actions, their familiar conversation, and catch
      the tone of their society. When we discover how far the most admirable
      community ever framed was removed from that perfection to which human
      society is impelled by some active power within each bosom to aspire, how
      great ought to be our hopes, how resolute our struggles! For the Greeks of
      the Periclean age were widely different from us. It is to be lamented that
      no modern writer has hitherto dared to show them precisely as they were.
      Barthelemi cannot be denied the praise of industry and system; but he
      never forgets that he is a Christian and a Frenchman. Wieland, in his
      delightful novels, makes indeed a very tolerable Pagan, but cherishes too
      many political prejudices, and refrains from diminishing the interest of
      his romances by painting sentiments in which no European of modern times
      can possibly sympathize. There is no book which shows the Greeks precisely
      as they were; they seem all written for children with the caution that no
      practice or sentiment, highly inconsistent with our present manners,
      should be mentioned, lest those manners should receive outrage and
      violation. But there are many to whom the Greek language is inaccessible,
      who ought not to be excluded by this prudery from possessing an exact and
      comprehensive conception of the history of man; for there is no knowledge
      concerning what man has been and may be, from partaking of which a person
      can depart, without becoming in some degree more philosophical, tolerant,
      and just.
    

      One of the chief distinctions between the manners of ancient Greece and
      modern Europe, consisted in the regulations and the sentiments respecting
      sexual intercourse. Whether this difference arises from some imperfect
      influence of the doctrines of Jesus, who alleges the absolute and
      unconditional equality of all human beings, or from the institutions of
      chivalry, or from a certain fundamental difference of physical nature
      existing in the Celts, or from a combination of all or any of these causes
      acting on each other, is a question worthy of voluminous investigation.
      The fact is, that the modern Europeans have in this circumstance, and in
      the abolition of slavery, made an improvement the most decisive in the
      regulation of human society; and all the virtue and the wisdom of the
      Periclean age arose under other institutions, in spite of the diminution
      which personal slavery and the inferiority of women, recognized by law and
      opinion, must have produced in the delicacy, the strength, the
      comprehensiveness, and the accuracy of their conceptions, in moral,
      political, and metaphysical science, and perhaps in every other art and
      science.
    

      The women, thus degraded, became such as it was expected they would
      become. They possessed, except with extraordinary exceptions, the habits
      and the qualities of slaves. They were probably not extremely beautiful;
      at least there was no such disproportion in the attractions of the
      external form between the female and male sex among the Greeks, as exists
      among the modern Europeans. They were certainly devoid of that moral and
      intellectual loveliness with which the acquisition of knowledge and the
      cultivation of sentiment animates, as with another life of overpowering
      grace, the lineaments and the gestures of every form which they inhabit.
      Their eyes could not have been deep and intricate from the workings of the
      mind, and could have entangled no heart in soul-enwoven labyrinths.
    

      Let it not be imagined that because the Greeks were deprived of its
      legitimate object, they were incapable of sentimental love; and that this
      passion is the mere child of chivalry and the literature of modern times.
      This object or its archetype for ever exists in the mind, which selects
      among those who resemble it that which most resembles it; and
      instinctively fills up the interstices of the imperfect image, in the same
      manner as the imagination moulds and completes the shapes in clouds, or in
      the fire, into the resemblances of whatever form, animal, building, &c.,
      happens to be present to it. Man is in his wildest state a social being: a
      certain degree of civilization and refinement ever produces the want of
      sympathies still more intimate and complete; and the gratification of the
      senses is no longer all that is sought in sexual connexion. It soon
      becomes a very small part of that profound and complicated sentiment,
      which we call love, which is rather the universal thirst for a communion
      not only of the senses, but of our whole nature, intellectual, imaginative
      and sensitive, and which, when individualized, becomes an imperious
      necessity, only to be satisfied by the complete or partial, actual or
      supposed fulfilment of its claims. This want grows more powerful in
      proportion to the development which our nature receives from civilization,
      for man never ceases to be a social being. The sexual impulse, which is
      only one, and often a small part of those claims, serves, from its obvious
      and external nature, as a kind of type or expression of the rest, a common
      basis, an acknowledged and visible link. Still it is a claim which even
      derives a strength not its own from the accessory circumstances which
      surround it, and one which our nature thirsts to satisfy. To estimate
      this, observe the degree of intensity and durability of the love of the
      male towards the female in animals and savages and acknowledge all the
      duration and intensity observable in the love of civilized beings beyond
      that of savages to be produced from other causes. In the susceptibility of
      the external senses there is probably no important difference.
    

      Among the ancient Greeks the male sex, one half of the human race,
      received the highest cultivation and refinement: whilst the other, so far
      as intellect is concerned, were educated as slaves and were raised but few
      degrees in all that related to moral of intellectual excellence above the
      condition of savages. The gradations in the society of man present us with
      slow improvement in this respect. The Roman women held a higher
      consideration in society, and were esteemed almost as the equal partners
      with their husbands in the regulation of domestic economy and the
      education of their children. The practices and customs of modern Europe
      are essentially different from and incomparably less pernicious than
      either, however remote from what an enlightened mind cannot fail to desire
      as the future destiny of human beings.
    

      [1818; publ. 1840]
    





 



</div></body></text></TEI>