<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Passages from the Life of a Philosopher</title><author>Babbage, Charles (1791-1871)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, and Green</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1864</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="34">CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE AUTHOR’S FURTHER CONTRIBUTIONS TO HUMAN
KNOWLEDGE.

Glaciers — Uniform Postage — Weight
of the Bristol Bags — Parcel
Post — Plan for trans­mit­ting Letters along
Aërial Wires — Cost of Verification is part of
Price — Sir Rowland Hill — Submarine
Navigation — Difference Engine — Analytical
Engine — Cause of Magnetic and Electric
Rotations — Mechanical Notation — Occulting
Lights — Semi-oc­cul­ta­tion may determine
Distances — Distinction of Lighthouses
numerically — Application from the United
States — Proposed Voyage — Loss
of the Ship and Mr. Reid — Congress of
Naval Officers at Brussels in 1853 — My
Portable Occulting Light exhibited — Night
Signals — Sun Signals — Solar
Occulting Lights — Afterwards used
at Sebastopol — Numerical Signals
applicable to all Dictionaries — Zenith
Light Signals — Telegraph for Ships on
Shore — Greenwich Time Signals — Theory
of Isothermal Surfaces to account for the Geological Facts
of the successive Uprising and Depression of various
parts of the Earth’s Surface — Games of
Skill — Tit-tat-to — Exhibitions — Problem
of the Three Magnetic Bodies.
Of Glaciers.
MUCH
has been written upon the subject of glaciers. The
view which I took of the question on my first acquaintance
with them still seems to me to afford a sufficient explanation
of the phenomena. It is probable that I may have been
anticipated in it by Saussure and others; but, having no time
to inquire into its history, I shall give a very brief statement
of those views.
The greater part of the material which ultimately constitutes
a glacier arises from the rain falling and the snow
deposited in the higher portions of
mountain ranges, which {442}
naturally first fill up the ravines and valleys, and rests on
the tops of the mountains, covering them to various depths.
The chief facts to be explained are—first, the causes of
the descent of these glaciers into the plains; second, the
causes of the transformation of the opaque consolidated snow
at the sources of the glacier into pure transparent ice at its
termination.
The glaciers usually lying in valleys having a steep descent,
gravity must obviously have a powerful influence; but its
action is considerably increased by another cause.
The heat of the earth and that derived from the friction
of the glacier and its broken fragments against the rock on
which it rests, as well as from the friction of its own fragments,
slowly melts the ice, and thus diminishing the amount
of its support, the ice above cracks and falls down upon the
earth, again to be melted and again to be broken.
But as the ice is upon an inclined plane, the pressure from
above, on the upper side of the fragment, will be greater than
that on the lower; consequently, at every fall the fallen mass
will descend by a very small quantity further into the valley.
Another consequence of the melting of the lower part of the
centre of the glacier will be that the centre will advance
faster than the sides, and its termination will form a curve
convex towards the valley.
The above was, I believe, the common explanation of the
formation of glaciers. The following part explains my own
views:—

Of the Causes of the Transformation of Condensed Snow into
Transparent Ice.
It is a well-known fact that water rapidly frozen retains all
the air it held in solution, and is opaque. {443}
It is also known that water freezing very slowly is transparent.
Whenever, by the melting of the lower portion of any part
of a glacier, a piece of it cracks and falls to a lower level, the
friction of the broken sides will produce heat, and melt a
small portion of water. This water, trickling down very
slowly, will form a thin layer on the broken surface, and a
portion will be retained in the narrowest part of the crack.
But, since the temperature of a glacier is very near the freezing
point, that water will freeze very slowly. It will, therefore,
become transparent ice, and will, as it were, solder together
the two adjacent surfaces by a thin layer of transparent ice.
But the transparent ice is much stronger and more difficult
to break than opaque ice; consequently, the next time the
soldered fragments are again broken, they will not break in
the strongest part, which is the transparent ice: but the next
fracture will occur in the opaque ice, as it was at first.
Thus, by the continued breaking and falling downward of
the fragments of the glacier, as it proceeds down the valley,
a series of vertical, rudely-parallel veins of transparent ice
will be formed. As these masses descend the valley, fresh
vertical layers of transparent ice will be interposed between
those already existing until the whole takes that beautiful
transparent cerulean tint which we so frequently see at the
lower termination of a glacier. Another effect of this vertical
fracture at the surfaces of least resistance will be alternate
vertical layers of opaque and transparent ice shading into each
other. This would, in some of its stages, give a kind of ribboned
appearance to the ice. Probably traces of it would
still be exhibited even in the most transparent ice. Speaking
roughly, this ribboned structure ought to be closer together
the nearer the piece examined is to the end of
the glacier. It {444}
ought also to be more apparent towards the centre of the glacier
than towards the sides. The effect of this progress downward
is to produce a very powerful friction between the masses
of ice and the earth over which they are pushed, and, consequently,
a continual accession to that stream of water which
is found issuing from all glaciers.
The result of this continual breaking up is to cause all the
water melted by the friction of the blocks of ice which is not
retained in the interstices to fall towards the lowest part of the
descending valley, and thus increase the stream, and so take
away more and more of the support of the central part of the
glacier. Hence the advance of the surface of the glacier
will be much quicker towards its middle than near the
sides.
〈CRACKS IN GLACIERS PERPENDICULAR.〉
The consequence of these actions is, that cracks in the ice
will occur generally in planes perpendicular to its surface.
The rain which falls upon the glacier, the water produced
from its surface by the sun’s rays and by the effect of the
temperature of the atmosphere, as well as the water produced
by the friction of its descending fragments, will penetrate
through these cracks, and be retained by capillary action on
the surfaces, and still more where the distance of the adjacent
surfaces is very small. The rest of this unfrozen water will
reach the rocky bottom of the glacier, and give up some of its
heat to the bed over which it passes, to be again employed in
melting away the lowest support of the glacier ice. Although
the temperature of the glacier should differ but by a very
small quantity from that of the freezing point of water, yet
these films will only freeze the more slowly, and therefore become
more solid and transparent ice. Their very thinness will
enable all the air to be more readily extricated by freezing.
The question of the regelation of pounded ice,
if by that {445}
term is meant anything more than welding ice by heat, or of
joining its parts by a process analogous to that which is called
burning together two separate portions of a bronze statue, has
always appeared to me unsat­is­fac­tory.
〈BURNING TOGETHER BRONZE.〉
The process of “burning together” is as follows:—Two
portions of a large statue, which have been cast separately,
are placed in a trough of sand, with their corresponding ends
near to each other. A channel is made in the sand, leading
through the junction of the parts to be united.
A stream of melted bronze is now allowed to run out from
the furnace through the channel between the contiguous ends
which it is proposed to unite. The first effect of this is to
heat the ends of the two fragments. After the stream of
melted metal has continued some time, the ends of those fragments
themselves begin to melt. When a small quantity of
each end is completely melted, the further flow of the melted
metal is stopped, and as soon as the pool of melted metal
connects, the two ends of the pieces to be united begins to
consolidate: the whole is covered up with sand and allowed
to cool gradually. When cold, the unnecessary metal is cut
away, and the fragments are as perfectly united as if they
had been originally cast in one piece.
The sudden consolidation, by physical force, of pounded ice
or snow appears to me to arise from the first effect of the
pressure producing heat, which melts a small portion into
water, and brings the particles of ice or snow nearer to each
other. The portion of water thus produced then, having its
heat abstracted by the ice, connects the particles of the latter
more firmly together by freezing.
If two flat surfaces of clear ice had a heated plate of metal
put between them, two very thin layers of water would be
formed between the ice and the heated plate.
If the hot {446}
plate were suddenly withdrawn, and the two plates of ice
pressed together, they would then be frozen together. This
would be equivalent to welding. In all these cases the temperature
of the ice must be a very little lower than the freezing-point.
The more nearly it approached that point the
slower the process of freezing would be, and therefore the
more transparent the ice thus formed.
〈ICE FROZEN IN THE EXHIBITION, 1862.〉
In the Exhibition of 1862 there were two different processes
by which ice was produced in abundance, even in the
heat of the Machinery Annex, in which they were placed.
In both the water was quickly converted into ice, and in
both cases the ice was opaque.
In one of them the ice was produced in the shape of long
hollow cylinders. These were quite opaque, and were piled
up in stacks. The temperature of the place caused the ice to
melt slowly; consequently, the interstices where the cylinders
rested upon each other, received and retained a small
portion of the water, which, trickling down, was detained by
capillary attraction. Here it was very slowly frozen, and
formed at the junction of the cylinders a thin film of transparent
ice. This gradually increased as the upper cylinders
of the ice melted away, and, after several hours’ exposure, I
have seen clear transparent ice a quarter of an inch thick,
where, at the commencement, there had not been even a
trace of translucency.
On inquiring of the operator why the original cylinders
were opaque, he told me, because they were frozen quickly.
I then pointed out to him the small portions of transparent
ice, which I have described, and asked him the cause. He
immediately said, because they had been frozen slowly.
It appeared to be an axiom, derived from his own experience,
that water quickly frozen is always
opaque, and water {447}
slowly frozen always transparent. I pointed out this practical
illustration to many of the friends I accompanied in their
examination of the machinery of the Annex.
</div></body></text></TEI>