<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Passages from the Life of a Philosopher</title><author>Babbage, Charles (1791-1871)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, and Green</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1864</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="31">CHAPTER XXXI.
A VISION.
HOW,
when, and where this vision occurred it is unnecessary
for me at present to state. It did not arise under the action
of the laughing-gas or of chloroform, but by some much
more real and immediate spiritual action. I had no perception
of body or of matter, yet I felt that I was in the
presence of a reasoning being of a different order from man.
Language was not the means of our communication; yet it
became necessary, in order to be intelligible, when I wrote
down the facts immediately after that singular event—but
language itself is quite insufficient to give an adequate idea
of its immense apparent duration.
The first difficulty I felt in this communion with an unearthly
Spirit was the notion of space. Our views of it
differed widely. On many points, as, for instance, measure,
we apprehended each other perfectly, for each referred to
the height of an individual of his own race—of course about
six feet. At last I discovered that my idea of space, which
was founded upon vacuity, was exactly the reverse of that
of the Spirit, which was based upon solidity. I will now,
as far as I can, place before my reader the information I
received.
〈THE CONSEQUENCES OF DOUBT.〉
The first desire I expressed to the Spirit was to learn, if
possible, his view of the origin of all things.
He stated that {407}
the records of his race, which he declared was the highest in
creation, went back, with great certainty, for myriads of
years before all other created beings: that previously to this,
their history was somewhat obscure, but had recently been
placed upon a much surer footing by some of their most
prominent Spirits.
(a.) In the beginning all space was fluid—apparently one
universal whitish liquid extended in all directions through
what we should call space; so I thought at first that this might
have some relation to the “milky way.” Its temperature
was considerable; and in about every thousand years a torrent
of this fluid, of a still higher temperature, passed through
space with a kind of gushing rush. It was peopled by
myriads of happy spirits floating about in it.
After long ages of happiness a dispute arose between two
Spirits as to the possibility of the existence of matter under
any other form than that of a fluid. The Power which
controlled their destiny, justly angry at their presumption,
threw into the fluid a very small piece of what, as far as
I could understand, was like organic matter.
(b.) The effect was astounding: all the fluid in contact with
this intrusive piece of matter gradually lost its fluidity, and a
new state of matter or of space arose which had been unknown
in all past time. The change advanced slowly but
certainly, on every side of the intruded matter. In its new
form, as far as I could make out, space became elastic gelatinous
matter. The two quarrelsome Spirits were the first
to be surrounded in it. None in the immediate presence of
this new kind of space could move away, and absorption went
on rapidly imprisoning millions of beings.
A great controversy arose as to the state of those embedded
in the jelly. Some supposed that they
were miserably squeezed, {408}
and maintained that they deserved to be thoroughly wretched.
Whilst others asserted, that being entirely relieved from
movement, theirs must be a state of perfect blessedness, their
whole faculties being absorbed in contemplation. In the
midst of these discussions the process of jellification was
advancing more and more rapidly, and in ten thousand years
the whole of infinite fluidity throughout all space, with all
its myriads of Beings embedded in it, was transformed into
this new form of space. From the description conveyed to
me by the Spirit, I should infer that the whole of what we
call infinite space had now become more nearly like blancmange
than any other sub-aërial substance.
〈SPACE TOO LARGE FOR ITSELF.〉
(c.) After a state of repose of many hundred thousand years
a new catastrophe occurred. Space became too large even
for itself. It then suffered, for many hundred thousand
years, enormous compression. During this long period all
its embedded Spirits perished, and space itself, during six
hundred thousand years, became one vast and solid desert,
containing no living beings.
But the vast periods of the past were as nothing compared
with the long series of cycles which now succeeded—each
in itself comprising millions of years.
About this time recorded history began, and is believed, by
the Spirit with whom I was in conference, to be as authentic
as the nature of the circumstances admit.
One solitary survivor seems to have escaped the crash of
systems and the condensation of space. He proceeded to cut
himself into two parts, and to advise each part to follow out
the same course, directing them to transmit the command of
their first parent throughout all time. Alone, in the midst of
infinite solidity, the newly-severed beings, setting themselves
back to back, exerted force. Thus urged,
matter itself gave {409}
way, and they occupied an elongated hollow space. Then
again bisecting themselves, they further lengthened the path.
After ten thousand years they began to exert their energies
in the transverse directions of that path, and thus widened it.
The race then began to form chambers, each for himself, into
which he might retire for abstruse calculations, the nature of
which seemed almost beyond the remotest reach of utility,
although not beyond the power of the Analytical Engine.
Thus vast cities, as it were, became formed, penetrating in
every direction through solid space.
(d.) After millions of years of industry quietness and calculations,
a most extraordinary catastrophe occurred. It was with
the greatest difficulty that I could discover its nature, or how
to explain it in ordinary language. The nearest approach I
can make towards its explanation is this:—It seemed, from
what my spiritual informant communicated, that the whole
universe was lifted up bodily, and then borne rapidly back
with a great shock, thus disarranging everything, and destroying
millions of their race.
〈CONVERSION OF ATTICS INTO CELLARS.〉
But the most in­com­pre­hen­sible part of this historic narration
was, that on the survivors recovering their senses, they
found that everything which had formerly been on their right
hand was now on their left. They also observed, to their still
greater dismay, that every abode in the universe was turned
topsy-turvy, so that the surviving phi­los­o­phers, who had
retired to their attics to study, suddenly found themselves in
their cellars.
I have conveyed, as carefully as the nature of the subject
admits, the impressions this relation made upon me, sometimes
assisted in my slow apprehensions by another unembodied
Spirit, whom, to distinguish from the relator, I shall
call Mathesis. {410}
〈THE TRUE USE OF FIGURES.〉
Whenever a man can get hold of numbers, they are invaluable:
if correct, they assist in informing his own mind,
but they are still more useful in deluding the minds of others.
Numbers are the masters of the weak, but the slaves of the
strong. I therefore earnestly pressed for more exact information
as to the possible number of years; but it appeared
beyond the Spirit’s power to estimate it, even within a few
millions. He mentioned incidentally that the last vast period
he had just described was merely one of many others of
similar extent: also, that though these periods were not
actually equal, the difference, which even in extreme cases
only reached a hundred thousand years, was not worth considering.
To gratify my longing desire for information on this most
important subject, the Spirit proceeded to inform me that
their histories recorded a large number of these successive
catastrophes, and that they were succeeded by a new and
more terrible one, which he was proceeding to explain, when
I interrupted him by asking for an approximate estimate of
their number. Aware of my anxious desire for numerical
accuracy, he said he could, in this one instance, gratify it
fully. “If there is,” said my informant, “any one point
better established than all others, it is that there had occurred
exactly one hundred and twenty-one of these avatars
of destruction.”
I now felt as if I had discovered one solitary fixed point in
the vast chaos of time. My guide described to me that, after
the termination of this system of one hundred and twenty-one
cycles, a new and more terrific system of events followed
each other.
First, however, he said he must mention an interregnum,
irregular in its progress, but still
of vast duration; {411}
in fact, some of his race had been able to prove that it
occupied at least three times as long as any one of those just
described.
〈VARIOUS SHAKES AND SMASHES.〉
(e.) It commenced by a motion very like that to which
space itself had been submitted at the end of each avatar,
finishing with a smash, and followed by a period of repose
of about ten thousand years. It however differed from those
avatars inasmuch as there was no inversion of the position of
cellar and attic.
(f.) A new form of shaking of universal solid space now
arose, much more frequent but less destructive than the
former. It occurred about once in two years, and was repeated
many hundred thousand times.
(g.) Again a period exactly similar to that recorded in
(e) occurred.
(h.) This was followed by a long series of movements of all
solidity, approaching, as far as I could understand it, to an
oscillating or wave motion. This continued without intermission
during exactly three of those cycles whose precise
number had been preserved.
(i.) During the whole of this period there was a great destruction
of the race. A universal sickness arose and continued
more or less, so that multitudes actually perished, and
those who escaped could scarcely carry on the ordinary calculations
necessary for their existence.
(j.) Another period followed, ending with a smash excessively
like (e).
(k.) Then followed a period of shaking like that in (f).
(l.) Then another smash like (e).
(m.) Period of long repose.
After this came a long state of absolute rest.
Such was the dawn of the most terrible, as
well as the {412}
most recent, of these vast changes in the universe which had
been so well related by my ethereal guide.
〈A COMMISSION SENT TO EXPLORE.〉
(n.) The temperature of the universe had been uniform
throughout many millions of years: it now began to change in
different isolated places. Increased cold in some parts drove
the inhabitants from their dwellings. This was followed by
torrents of invisible air, bringing infection and death to
millions of their race. Public opinion was roused, and their
academies of science and of arts were urged to devise
a remedy. An expedition was sent by their school of
Science and of Geology to endeavour to trace the origin of
this plague.
The Commission, after long investigation, reported that they
had penetrated solid space in their usual way, putting each
other back to back, and pressing the foremost forward. It
also stated that one of them had invented a method of
arrangement of the members in a kind of wedge form, which
they found much more effective for their object. The result
of this, however, was that the leader of the column got so
many squeezes, that all their best Spirits declined a position
for which coarser animals were better fitted. Consequently,
most of their Presidents of scientific bodies were selected from
what we should call the “Demi-monde” of science.
The first report of this Commission stated that, after penetrating
space (by pushing) through many thousand miles,
they had reached the cause of all the evil. They had ascertained
that it arose from the fact they had discovered,—that
space itself was discontinuous:—that they had reached a spot
where there was a kind of chasm in it, into which some of
them tumbled, and were with difficulty extricated:—in fact,
they reported that it was only necessary to send proper persons
to fill up this chasm in order to restore the
universe to health. {413}
〈WELL FED AND WELL PAID ON RETURN.〉
Great rejoicings were made on the return of this Commission.
Public meetings were held, speeches were made,
papers were read, and medals were lavished. Those who
had interest used their services on this committee to justify
their promotion, each in his own different line. Those who
had no interest as well as those who had, were anointed
daily during twelve months with what I can but very imperfectly
describe by calling it lip-salve. All this while they
were fed at the public expense with royal food, which was
highly coveted; but as far as I could make out, its taste
must have been somewhat intermediate between rancid butter
and flummery. Whatever this may have been, they relished
it highly, and in truth it seems to have been well suited to
their organs of digestion.
Time, however, went on; the pestilence increased. Strange
reports arose: first, that space itself was decaying; then, that
there existed somewhere in decayed space an immense
dragon whose breath produced the pestilence, and who swallowed
up thousands of Spirits at each mouthful.
Another Commission was sent, with in­struc­tions to fill up
the hole in space. This was supposed to be a great step in
advance. Having penetrated a very short distance beyond
the celebrated chasm, they found another just like it, and on
the same level. They found the first chasm slightly curved,
which had indeed been remarked by an unpretending member
of the former Commission: but so simple a remark was not
thought worth reporting. The second chasm also was found
slightly curved, but its curvature was in an opposite direction,
presenting rudely the appearance of two parentheses, thus
(    ). Upon this discovery the Commission were inclined
to return and report that a series of chasms occurred in
advance of the first, and that it
would be useless—indeed, {414}
that it would be highly dangerous—to open more chasms.
One of the most modest of the Com­mis­sion­ers, who had been
snubbed on the former occasion, suggested, however, that
these slightly-curved chasms might possibly be portions of
some vast circular crack: an idea which was ridiculed as a
wild hypothesis by the chairman, quizzed by the secretary,
and laughed at by all the rest. Fortunately they were persuaded
to excavate a few yards more on the second vertical
chasm or crack, when it became probable that the single
dissentient was right. It soon became certain, and before
half the circle had been uncovered, each member of the commission
thought he had himself been the first to discover its
circular shape.
〈THE MODEL CHAIRMAN.〉
But the chairman was a person of large experience. He
quietly left the Com­mis­sion­ers to fight amongst themselves
about the discovery of the circle, and if they chose, even about
its quadrature. On his return, however, he reported that
from some very extensive calculations of his own he had
anticipated an elliptic cavity; that he had directed the attention
of the Com­mis­sion­ers to the subject; and that they had
succeeded in verifying his prediction. He also stated that
the same theory led him to the knowledge of the fact, that
in certain cases the ellipse might approach very nearly to a
circle, although it could never actually reach it, whilst on
the other hand it might become so flat as to approach a
straight line—an approximation to which nobody ever suggested
that the chairman himself could have attained. The
chairman then, with singular modesty, alluding in his report
to one of his colleagues possessing high rank, great influence
and a very moderate knowledge of science, remarked that it
was fortunate for him (the chairman) that that distinguished
member had been so fully occupied with
much more valuable {415}
investigations, otherwise he would certainly have anticipated
the important discovery it had fallen to his own lot to make.
〈THE COMMISSIONERS OUT-MANŒUVRED.〉
In the meantime the Com­mis­sion­ers, who had each wished
to appropriate to himself the discovery of the circle, now
thought that this usurpation of it by their chairman was most
unjust towards the unpretending member who had really
made it. They therefore advised him to claim his own discovery,
and promised to back him in asserting it.
But their chairman really was a clever fellow,56
and deep
as Silurian rocks. Aware of the importance of the discovery
thus appropriated, he had already visited the modest Com­mis­sion­er—had
overwhelmed him with compliments, and had
also prevailed upon that other influential Com­mis­sion­er whom
he had so well buttered in his Report, to give him a small
piece of preferment, which had been accepted by his victim:—thus
putting a padlock upon his lips, which his brother
Com­mis­sion­ers were unable either to unlock or to pick.

56
A clever fellow may oc­ca­sion­al­ly snatch our applause; but
a clever man can alone command our respect.
After the Report was presented, more speeches were made—more
medals given, but the plague con­tin­ued, and their
un­i­verse was de­pop­u­la­ted.
A third Commission was afterwards sent, who reported that
they found at the spot previously reached, on either side,
two vast circles, the diameter of each of which was one
hundred times the height of an ordinary individual; that the
material occupying space within the circle differed slightly
from that without it; and that it appeared as if a vast
cylinder of space had been pushed through without disturbing
the matter external to it. They also reported that the former
Com­mis­sion­ers had never approached the origin of the mischief,
but had simply worked their way, at right angles, to a
{416}
line which might terminate in it at the distance of a thousand
miles, more or less, either on the right or on the left hand of
the point they had reached.
〈DISTURBED VISION.〉
At this moment a sound like the roll of distant thunder
recalled me to this lower world, and interrupted my interesting
communion with the world of Spirits. That noise arose
from the chimes of the cathedral clock. Spending a few
days at Salisbury, I had wandered into the cathedral, and
being much fatigued, had selected the luxurious pew of the
Dean as a place of temporary rest. Reposing on elastic
cushions, with my head resting on an eider-down pillow, the
vision I have related had taken place.
On removing the pillow I observed a small piece of matter
beneath it. This, upon examination, turned out to be a morsel
of decayed Gloucester cheese. The whole vision was now
very clearly explained. The verger had evidently retired to
the most commodious pew to eat his dinner, and had inadvertently
left the small bit of cheese upon the very spot I had
selected for my temporary repose. It was clear that my
Spirit had been put, en rapport, with the soul of a mite, one
of the most cultivated of his race.
If the reader will glance over the following brief explanation,
he will be fully convinced that my solution of this vision
is the true one.

Parallel Passages in the Creation of the Universe and in the
Birth and Education of a Gloucester Cheese.

References.
a. Milk gushing into the milk-pail at the rate of twenty
gushes per minute. Alternations of greater and
less heat.
b. Rennet being thrown in, the milk curdles.
c. Curds
compressed into cheese. {417}
d. Cheese turned over daily during
121 days.
A few minutes’ difference in the time of
   the dairyman’s attendance to perform this operation made the days
   slightly unequal.
e. Cheese lifted up and pitched
into a cart.
f. Cheese jolted in cart during
half a day on its way to to be shipped at Gloucester.
g. Cheese pitched from cart into
ship.
h. Ship sails with the cheese for
Southampton.
i. The motion of the waves makes
the mites sea-sick for three days. Multitudes die.
j. Cheese taken from ship and
pitched into a cart; as in the period e.
k. Cheese conveyed in cart to
cheesemonger at Salisbury—the mites dreadfully jolted,
l. Cheese pitched into
cheesemonger’s shop, as in e.
m. Long period of repose of the
cheese on the cheesemonger’s shelf.
n. A cylindrical cavity made and
piece taken out for a customer to taste. Portion of cylinder replaced.
Air being let in, a part of the cheese becomes rotten, in which large
worms are produced, giving rise to the story of the dragon.

〈EXPLANATION.〉
In order to discover the month in which the cheese was
made, I remarked that, since it was turned over on its shelf
in the cheese-room exactly 121 times, it must have been
first placed there in some month which, together with the
three succeeding months, had a number of days exactly equal
to 121. {418}
〈CALCULATION.〉
I then computed the following Table:—


Table of the number of Days contained in each
four months, commencing on the first day of each month and ending on
the last day of the fourth following month.


Number of Days.

1 January to 30 April
120

1 February to 31 May
120

1 March to 30 June
122

1 April to 31 July
122

1 May to 31 August
123

1 June to 30 September
122

1 July to 31 October
123

1 August to 30 November
122

1 September to 31 December
122

1 October to 31 January
123

1 November to 28 February
120

1 December to 31 March
121

Now, from the preceding Table it appears that there is
only one month in the year fulfilling this condition, namely,
the month of March. It follows, therefore, that the cheese
must have been made four months before, that is, in the
month of December.

Shortly after this vision I received a visit from that great
geologist, the erudite Professor Ponderdunder,57
a member of
all existing Academies, and Secretary of the most celebrated
How-and-wi Academy for the Reconstruction of Primeval
Time. I was anxious to have the opinion of this learned
person upon my recent experience: but he was evidently
envious of my vision, which he
treated disrespectfully. {419}
Possessed of an intellect which was anything but precocious, I
had with much labour at last made him apprehend the arithmetic
by which I had discovered the exact month of December
in the date of the great series of 121 cataclysms, and I felt
much mortified that he did not appreciate my ingenuity.
All of a sudden he seemed intuitively to perceive the use
that might be made of this vision. He then asked me with
great earnestness whether I had communicated this new
method of reasoning to any other person. On my answering
in the negative, he entreated me not to say a word about it.
He was especially anxious that Gardner Wilkinson, Layard,
and Rawlinson should not get hold of it, lest they might
anticipate the discovery which it would enable him to complete.
He assured me that he could, by visiting Nineveh, and
taking the Pyramids and Jericho on his road, with the aid of
my formula, restore the true chronology from the creation.

57
Author of the celebrated Treatise “On the Entity of
Space,” the basis of all sound metaphysical reasoning.
〈THE LEARNED PONDERDUNDER STARTS FOR JERICHO.〉
Having given him this promise, he left me, and immediately
telegraphed to a very influential friend, the Vice-President
who managed the How-and-wi Academy, suggesting that not
a moment should be lost in authorizing him to set out on
this expedition, which although painfully laborious to himself
personally and not without peril, he was willing to undertake
for the glory of the Academy, and from the religious conviction
that it would enable him to refute the frightful heresy
of Bishop Colenso. Within twenty-four hours the faithful
telegraph brought him back the order to start and the
credit necessary for his equipment. He soon completed the
latter, and was en route within the time I have mentioned.
It is with deep regret I have now to state, that just ten
days after the active Secretary had started on his pious mission,
I discovered that my reasoning about the month of
December with all its consequences
was completely vitiated {420}
by not having taken into consideration the existence of leap
years, in which case the magic number 121 occurs in no less
than four cases; so that nothing at all is decided by it.
I can only add my hope that, if any of my readers should
become acquainted with the whereabouts of the learned
Ponderdunder, he would kindly communicate by electric
telegraph this painful intelligence to that energetic traveller.
I have sub­se­quent­ly been informed that Professor Ponderdunder’s
honorarium is only £800 a-year, and the payment
of all travelling expenses. The former is doubled upon
dangerous travel. I was told that he also enjoys a snug
sinecure of considerable value recently instituted in his own
country; being at the head of the department for the promotion
of “Small Science and Low Art.” The family of the
Ponderdunders possess the peculiar gift of manipulating
learned bodies. The Flowery—Rhetorical, and the Zoo-Ethnological
Societies barely escaped perdition under their costly
autocracy. I regret also to add, (but truth forbids me to
conceal the interesting fact) that Ponderdunder is not a
member of all existing academies as his visiting card indicated.
</div></body></text></TEI>