<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Passages from the Life of a Philosopher</title><author>Babbage, Charles (1791-1871)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, and Green</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1864</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="10">CHAPTER X.
THE EXHIBITION OF 1862.

“En administration, toutes les sottises
sont mères.”—Maximes, par M. G. De Levis.
“An abject worship of princes and an unaccountable appetite for
knighthood are probably unavoidable results of placing second-rate men
in prominent positions.”—Saturday Review, January 16, 1864.
“Whose fault is this? But tallow, toys, and sweetmeats evidently
stand high in the estimation of Her Majesty’s Com­mis­sion­ers.”—The
Times, August 13, 1862.

 Mr. Gravatt suggests to King’s College the
exhibition of the Dif­fer­ence Engine No. 1, and offers to superintend
its Trans­mis­sion and Return — Place allotted to it
most unfit — Not Exhibited in 1851 — Its
Loan refused to New York — Refused to the Dublin
Exhibition in 1847 — Not sent to the great
French Exhibition in 1855 — Its Exhibition in
1862 entirely due to Mr. Gravatt — Space for its
Drawings refused — The Payment of Six Shillings
a Day for a compe­tent person to explain it refused by the
Com­mis­sioners — Copy of Swedish Dif­fer­ence Engine made
by English Workmen not exhibited — Loan of various
other Cal­cu­la­ting Machines offered — Anecdote of Count
Strzelecki’s — The Royal Com­mis­sion­ers’ elaborate taste
for Children’s Toys — A plan for making such Exhibitions
prof­i­table — Extrav­a­gance of the Com­mis­sioners to their
favourite — Contrast between his Treat­ment and that of
Indust­rious Workmen — The Inventor of the Dif­fer­ence
Engine publicly insulted by his Country­men in the Exhibition of
1862.
Circumstances connected with the Exhibition of the Difference
Engine No. 1 in the International Exhibition of 1862.
WHEN
the construction of the Difference Engine No. 1 was
abandoned by the Government in 1842, I was consulted respecting
the place in which it should be deposited. Well
aware of the unrivalled perfection of
its workmanship, and {148}
conscious that it formed the first great step towards reducing
the whole science of number to the absolute control of
mechanism, I wished it to be placed wherever the greatest
number of persons could see it daily.
〈ENGINE No. 1 IN KING’S COLLEGE.〉
With this view, I advised that it should be placed in one
of the much-frequented rooms of the British Museum. Another
locality was, however, assigned to it, and it was confided
by the Government to the care of King’s College,
Somerset House. It remained in safe custody within its
glass case in the Museum of that body for twenty years.
It is remarkable that during that long period no person
should have studied its structure, and, by explaining its
nature and use, have acquired an amount of celebrity which
the singularity of that knowledge would undoubtedly have
produced.
The College authorities did justice to their charge. They
put it in the place of honour, in the centre of their Museum,
and would, no doubt have given facilities to any of their
members or to other persons who might have wished to
study it.
〈THE GOVERNMENT IGNORE IT.〉
But the system quietly pursued by the Government, of
ignoring the existence of the Difference Engine and its
inventor doubtlessly exercised its deadening influence27
on
those who were inclined, by taste or acquirements, to take
such a course. {149}

27
An illustration fell under my notice a few days after
this paragraph was printed. A new work on Geometrical Drawing,
commissioned by the Committee of Council on Education, was published
by Professor Bradley. I have not been able to find in it a single word
concerning “Mechanical Notation,” not even the very simplest portion
of that science, namely, the Art of Lettering Drawings. It would seem
impossible that any Professor of so limited a subject could be
ignorant of the existence of such an important addition to its powers.
I shall enumerate a few instances.
1. In 1850, the Government appointed a Commission to
organize the Exhibition of 1851.
The name of the author of the Economy of Man­u­fac­tures
was not thought worthy by the Government to be placed on
that Commission.
2. In 1851, the Com­mis­sion­ers of the International Exhibition
did not think proper to exhibit the Difference
Engine, although it was the property of the nation. They
were as insensible to the greatest mechanical as to, what has
been regarded by some, the greatest in­tel­lec­tual triumph of
their country.
3. When it was decided by the people of the United
States to have an Exhibition at New York, they sent a
Com­mis­sion­er to Europe to make arrangement for its success.
He was authorized to apply for the loan of the Difference
Engine for a few months, and was empowered to give any
pecuniary guarantee which might be required for its safe
return.
That Com­mis­sion­er, on his arrival, applied to me on
the subject. I explained to him the state of the case, and
advised him to apply to the Government, whose property it
was. I added that, if his application was successful, I would at
my own expense put the machine in good working order, and
give him every information requisite for its safe conveyance
and use. His application was, however, unsuccessful.
4. In 1847, Mr. Dargan nobly undertook at a vast expense
to make an Exhibition in Dublin to aid in the relief of his
starving countrymen. It was thought that the exhibition of
the Difference Engine would be a great attraction. I was
informed at the time that an application was made to the
Government for its loan, and that it
was also unsuccessful. {150}
5. In 1855 the great French Exhibition occurred. Previously
to its opening, our Government sent Com­mis­sion­ers
to arrange and superintend the English department.
These Com­mis­sion­ers reported that the English cont­ri­bu­tion
was remarkably deficient in what in France are termed
“instruments de précision,” a term which includes a variety
of instruments for scientific purposes. They recommended
that “a Committee should be appointed who could represent
to the producers of Philosophical Instruments how necessary
it was that they should, upon an occasion of this kind, maintain
their credit in the eyes of Europe.” The Government
also applied to the Royal Society for advice; but neither did
the Royal Society advise, nor the Government propose, to
exhibit the Difference Engine.
6. The French Exhibition of 1855 was remarkable beyond
all former ones for the number and ingenuity of the machines
which performed arithmetical operations.
Pre-eminently above all others stood the Swedish Machine
for calculating and printing math­e­mat­i­cal Tables. It is
honourable to France that its highest reward was deservedly
given to the inventor of that machine; whilst it is somewhat
remarkable that the English Com­mis­sion­ers appointed to
report upon the French Exhibition omitted all notice of these
Calculating Machines.
〈MR. GRAVATT SUCCEEDS IN EXHIBITING IT IN 1862.〉
The appearance of the finished portion of the unfinished
Difference Engine No. 1 at the Exhibition of 1862 is entirely
due to Mr. Gravatt. That gentleman had a few years before
paid great attention to the Swedish Calculating Engine of
M. Scheutz, and was the main cause of its success in this
country.
Being satisfied that it was possible to calculate and print
all Tables by machinery, Mr. Gravatt
became convinced that {151}
the time must arrive when no Tables would ever be calculated
or printed except by machines. He felt that it was of great
importance to accelerate the arrival of that period, more
especially as numerical Tables, which are at present the most
expensive kind of printing, would then become the cheapest.
In furtherance of this idea, Mr. Gravatt wrote to Dr. Jelf,
the Principal of King’s College, Somerset House, to suggest
that the Difference Engine of Mr. Babbage, which had for so
many years occupied a prominent place in the museum,
should be exhibited in the International Exhibition of 1862.
He at the same time offered his assistance in the removal and
reinstatement of that instrument.
The authorities of the College readily acceded to this
plan. On further inquiry, it appeared that the Difference
Engine belonged to the Government, and was only deposited
with the College. It was then found necessary to make an
application to the Treasury for permission to exhibit it, which
was accordingly done by the proper authorities.
The Government granted the permission, and referred it to
the Board of Works to superintend its placement in the
building.
The Board of Works sent to me a copy of the correspondence
relative to this matter, asking my opinion whether
any danger might be apprehended for the safety of the
machine during its transport, and also inquiring whether I
had any other suggestion to make upon the subject.
Knowing the great strength of the work, I immediately
answered that I did not anticipate the slightest injury
from its transport, and that, under the superintendence of
Mr. Gravatt, I considered it might be removed with perfect
safety. The only suggestion I ventured to offer was, that as
the Government possessed in the
department of the {152}
Registrar-General a copy, made by English workmen, of the
Swedish Difference Engine, that it should be exhibited by
the side of mine: and that both the Engines should be kept
constantly working with a very slow motion.
〈SWEDISH ENGINE NOT EXHIBITED.〉
By a subsequent communication I was informed that the
Swedish Machine could not be exhibited, because it was then
in constant use, computing certain Tables relating to the
values of lives. I regretted this very much. I had intended
to alter the handle of my own Engine in order to make it
moveable circularly by the same catgut which I had hoped
might have driven both. The Tables which the Swedish
Machine was employed in printing were not of any pressing
necessity, and their execution could, upon such an occasion,
have been postponed for a few months without loss or inconvenience.
Besides, if the Swedish Engine had, as I proposed, been
placed at work, its superintendent might have continued his
table-making with but little delay, and the public would have
been highly gratified by the sight.
He could also have given information to the public by
occasional explanations of its principles; thus might Her
Majesty’s Com­mis­sion­ers have gratified thousands of her
subjects who came, with intense curiosity, prepared to be
pleased and instructed, and whom they sent away amazed
and disappointed.
From the experience I had during the first week of the
Exhibition, I am convinced that if a fit place had been provided
for the two Calculating Machines, so that the public
might have seen them both in constant but slow motion, and if
the superintendent had oc­ca­sion­al­ly given a short explanation
of the principles on which they acted, they would have been
one of the greatest attractions
within the building. {153}
On Mr. Gravatt applying to the Com­mis­sion­ers for space,
it was stated that the Engine must be placed amongst philosophical
instruments, Class XIII.
〈ENGLISH ENGINE POKED INTO A HOLE.〉
The only place offered for its reception was a small hole,
4 feet 4 inches in front by 5 feet deep. On one side of this
was the only passage to the office of the superintendent
of the class. The opposite side was occupied by a glass
case in which I placed specimens of the separate parts of
the unfinished engine. These, although executed by English
workmen above thirty years ago, were yet, in the opinion
of the most eminent engineers, unsurpassed by any work
the building of 1862 contained. The back of this recess
was closed in and dark, and only allowed a space on the wall
of about five feet by four, on which to place the whole of the
drawings and illustrations of the Difference Engine. Close
above the top of the machine was a flat roof, which deprived
the drawings and the work itself of much light.
The public at first flocked to it: but it was so placed that
only three persons could conveniently see it at the same time.
When Mr. Gravatt kindly explained and set it in motion, he
was continually interrupted by the necessity of moving away in
order to allow access to the numerous persons whose business
called them to the superintendent’s office. At a very early
period various rep­re­sen­ta­tions were made to the Com­mis­sion­ers
by the Jury, the superintendent, and very strongly by
the press, of the necessity of having some qualified person to
explain the machine to the public. I was continually informed
by the attendants that hundreds of persons had, during
my absence asked, when they could get an opportunity of
seeing the machine in motion.
Admiring the earnestness of purpose and the sagacity with
which Mr. Gravatt had steadily followed out
the convictions of {154}
his own mind relative to the abolition of all tables except
those made and stereotyped by machinery, I offered all the
assistance in my power to accelerate the accomplishment of
his task.
I lent him for exhibition numerous specimens of the
unfinished portions of the Difference Engine No. 1. These I
had purchased on the determination of the Government to
abandon its construction in 1842.
I proposed also to lend him the Mechanical Notations of
the Difference Engine, which had been made at my own
expense, and were finished by myself and my eldest son,
Mr. B. Herschel Babbage.
I had had several applications from foreigners28
for some
account of my system of Mechanical Notation, and great
desire was frequently expressed to see the illustrations of the
method itself, and of its various applications.

28
One object of the mission of Professor Bolzani was, to
take back with him to Russia such an account of the Mechanical Notation
as might facilitate its teaching in the Russian Universities. I regret
that it was entirely out of my power to assist him.
These, however, were so extensive that it was impossible,
without very great inconvenience, to exhibit them even in
my own house.
〈THE LOAN OF OTHER CALCULATING MACHINES OFFERED.〉
I therefore wrote to Mr. Gravatt to offer him the loan of
the following property for the Exhibition:—
</div></body></text></TEI>