<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Passages from the Life of a Philosopher</title><author>Babbage, Charles (1791-1871)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, and Green</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1864</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="35">CHAPTER XXXV.
RESULTS OF SCIENCE.

Board of Longitude — Professorship of Mathematics
at the East India College — Professorship
of Mathematics at Edinburgh — Secretaryship
of the Royal Society — Master of the
Mint — Ditto — Ditto — Registrar-General
of Births, Deaths, and
Marriages — Ditto — Com­mis­sion­er of
Railways — Ditto — Ditto Abolished.
AT
the commencement of life I had hoped that, whilst I
indulged in the pursuits of science, I might derive from it
some advantages for my family, or at least, that it might
enable me to replace a small portion of the large expenditure,
without which one of my most important discoveries could
not be practically worked out.
I shall now mention briefly several of those appointments
for which I had the vanity to suppose myself qualified, and
the simplicity to believe that fitness for the office was of the
slightest use without interest to get the appointment.
1. In the early part of 1816 the Professorship of Mathematics
at the East India College at Haileybury became vacant. The
salary, I believe, was 500 l. a-year. I became a candidate, and
had strong recommendations from Ivory and Playfair. I was
informed that it was usual for the candidates to call on the
Directors. I did so. One of them was an honest man, for
he was kind enough to tell me the truth. He said, “If you
have interest, you will get it; if not, you
will not succeed.” {474}
2. In 1819 the Professorship of Mathematics at Edinburgh
became vacant by the death of Playfair, and the succession
of Professor Leslie to his chair. I immediately became a
candidate, and received testimony of my fitness from Lacroix,
Biot, and Laplace.
These communications, though gratifying to myself, were
useless for the object. Not being a Scot, I was rejected at
Edinburgh. That visit, however, led to a very agreeable incident.
I spent a delightful week at Kinneil with Dugald
Stewart. The second volume of his “Philosophy of the
Human Mind” had fortunately fallen into my hands at an
early period during my residence at Cambridge, and I had
derived much in­struc­tion from that valuable work.
〈BOARD OF LONGITUDE.〉
3. About this time, in a conversation with Sir Joseph
Banks, I mentioned my wish to have a seat at the Board of
Longitude—an office to which a salary of 100 l. a-year was
attached. Although not then appointed, hopes were held out
by Sir Joseph that at some future occasion I might be more
successful. In 1820 another vacancy occurred in the Board
of Longitude. I called on Sir Joseph Banks to ask his
influence with the Admiralty; this he declined, alleging as
a reason for withholding it,—the part I had taken in the institution
of the Astronomical Society.
I was one of its founders, had been one of its first Honorary
Secretaries, and had taken an active part in that Committee,
by which the “Nautical Almanac” was remodelled.
4. In 1824 an opportunity unexpectedly presented itself. I
was invited to take the entire organization and management
of an office for the assurance of lives, then about to be established.
It is sufficient to state that amongst our officers were the
late Marquis of Lansdowne, the late
Lord Abercrombie, the {475}
present Master of the Rolls, and the present Judge of the
Admiralty Court; and that our direction included some of
the first merchants in the City, two or three Directors of
the Bank of England, and about an equal number of India
Directors.
〈LIFE ASSURANCE OFFICE.〉
The proposition made to me was that I should have the entire
man­age­ment of the concern as Director and Actuary, with a salary of
1,500 l. a-year, and apartments in the es­tab­lish­ment, with
liberty to practise as an Actuary.
On consulting my friend the late Francis Baily, F.R.S.,
who had himself practised as an Actuary, he strongly advised
me to accept the office. He assured me that the profit arising
from private practice could scarcely be less than 1,000 l. a
year, and would probably be much more.
Under these circumstances, I accepted the proposition. On
examining the materials which existed for a Table of the value
of lives, I found in one of the addresses of Mr. Morgan, the
Actuary of the Equitable, materials with which to construct,
by the aid of various calculations, a very tolerable Table of
the actual mortality in that Society. Upon this basis I calculated
the Tables of our new Institution. After three months’
labour, when the whole of the arrangements had been completed,
and the day for our opening had been fixed, circumstances
occurred which induced us to give up the plan. After
the experience I had now had of the amount of time occupied
by such an office, I was unwilling to renew the engagement
with other parties. I hoped by great exertions to complete
the Difference Engine after the lapse of a few years, and that I
should not be allowed to become a serious loser by that course.
The Institution was therefore given up, and we each contributed
about 100 l. to discharge the expenses incurred.
Within the subsequent twelvemonth, an
application to take {476}
the management of another Life Assurance Society was made
to me, which I declined. That office is still in existence.
The information and experience I had thus gained led me
to think that the public were not sufficiently informed
respecting the nature of assurances on lives, and that a small
popular work on the subject might be useful. I prepared
such a work as intervals of leisure admitted, and early in
1826 published it under the title of “A Comparative View of
the various Institutions for the Assurance of Lives.” This
little volume was soon translated into German, and became
the groundwork upon which the Great Life Assurance Society
of Gotha was founded. Every year since that event I have
received a copy of the report of the state of the Institution—a
gratifying attention which I am happy to have this
opportunity of acknowledging.
The wish expressed by my translator, in his Preface,64
has
also been fulfilled by the establishment of many other excellent
Life Assurance Offices, founded on similar principles.

64
“May this book soon give rise to many flourishing life
assurance companies in our beloved fatherland, by which proportionate
wealth and happiness may be promoted amongst us, and at the same time
prepare for the decline of lotteries.”—German translation of Babbage
on Life Assurance.
〈GERMAN ASSURANCE COMPANIES.〉
In Germany alone there were, in 1860, twenty-four Life
Assurance Companies, in which about 260,000 persons were
assured to the amount of upwards of forty millions sterling.
The oldest and most successful of these institutions have
adopted my Table of the Equitable experience, and I am
informed that it agrees very well with the results of their own
experience up to about the fifty-seventh year. After this the
deaths are rather more frequent than those of the Equitable.
Another still more gratifying result arose. My father,
whose acquaintance with mercantile
affairs was very {477}
extensive, was so pleased with the little book that, during the two
last years of his life, he read it through three times.
〈MASTERSHIP OF THE MINT.〉
5. In 1846 the Mastership of the Mint became vacant. In
former days it was held by Newton. I had pointed it out in
“The Decline of Science” as one of those offices to which
men of science might reasonably aspire. A complete acquaintance
with the most advanced state of mechanical science,
which the demands of my own machinery had compelled me
to improve, added to a knowledge of the internal economy of
manufactories, appeared to me to constitute fair claims to that
office.
In the event of my succeeding, I had proposed to let the
whole of my salary accumulate, so that at the end of ten or
twelve years I might retire from the office, and be enabled,
with the 20,000 l. thus earned, to construct the Analytical
Engine.
I wrote to Lord Melbourne on the subject, but I did not
mention that circumstance even to my most intimate friends.
It came, however, to the knowledge of one of them, who took
a very warm interest in my success; and I believe that at
first I had a very fair chance. The appointment remained
for a short time in abeyance; but it was found necessary to
detach Sheil from O’Connell, and the appointment was therefore
given to Sheil.
Some years after, when Sheil was appointed our Minister
at the court of Tuscany, he asked me to give him a letter of
introduction to the Grand Duke Leopold II. Of course I
treated the application as a joke; but Sheil assured me that
he was quite serious, and that he knew it would be of use to
him. I therefore gave him a letter of introduction to a
sovereign from whom both before and sub­se­quent­ly I have
been honoured by
many gratifying attentions. {478}
6. In 1849, on the promotion of Sheil, the Mastership of
the Mint again became vacant. I thought my own claims
sufficiently known to the public; but I had no political interest.
My friend Sir John Herschel was more fortunate,
and he received the appointment.
7. After a few years, the office again became vacant by the
resignation of Sir John Herschel. The Government had now
for the third time an opportunity of partially repairing its
former neglect. I had, however, no political party to support
me, and the present Master of the Mint, Mr. Graham, then
received the appointment.

Registrar-General of Births, Deaths, &c.
8. In 1835 a new office was created, that of Registrar-General
of Births, Deaths, and Marriages. Mr. Francis Baily
and others of my friends suggested to me that, being known
to the public as qualified for this situation by my previous
publications, I had a fair claim to the appointment. Having
made inquiries on this subject, I found that it would be
useless to make any application, as the place was intended for
the brother-in-law of a Secretary of State.
9. On the death of Mr. Lister, a few years after, the same
office again became vacant, when other friends then made a
similar suggestion.
On making preliminary inquiries, I found, as before, that
all applications would be useless, as the appointment was
intended for a military officer, Major Graham, the brother of
another Secretary of State.

Com­mis­sion­ers of Railways.
10. Some years ago, the alarm created by accidents
occurring upon railways, induced the
Government to consider {479}
about the appointment of a Commission to examine into their
causes, and to lay down rules for the guidance of the Companies
in the prevention of those dangers.
In 1846 an Act of Parliament was passed appointing Com­mis­sion­ers
for the supervision of railways. Having myself
thought much upon the subject, and having had personally
some experience on railways, I had the vanity to think that
the mechanical knowledge of the author of “The Economy
of Man­u­fac­tures” would justify his appointment as one of
those Com­mis­sion­ers.
Applying, under such circumstances, for a Com­mis­sion­ership
of the Railway Board, I expected that I should find few
competitors with higher claims. But I had no interest—a
military engineer was appointed, who already held a civil
appointment, and who died in less than two years after.
11. On the occurrence of this vacancy another military
officer was appointed. I was again passed over, under circumstances
which at the time I thought must have caused
deep regret in the mind of the Minister who made the appointment.
After an existence of a few years, public opinion was so
strongly expressed against the Railway Commission that it
was dissolved.
I am satisfied that in each of these cases, the appointment
was entirely due to family or political influence.
I have, in the course of my experience, frequently heard of
appointments made in the most flattering and unexpected
manner; of titles offered, in fact, in such a way, that it was
impossible to decline them. Having myself seen a good deal
behind the scenes of the drama of life, I have repeatedly
found that these unsolicited honours have been obtained by
the most persevering applications, and by
the most servile {480}
flattery. Indeed, to the great scandal of public life, success
has in some instances been attained by a man condescending
for a time to oppose his own party, and, as some observer has
wittily remarked, “of attempting to break into the shop for
the purpose of serving behind the counter.”
〈REFLECTIONS ON PATRONAGE.〉
It cannot be doubted that patronage entrusted to the disposition
of a Minister often proves an onerous and ungrateful
trust, demanding powers of discrimination and forbearance
not always found in public men; whilst a careful ob­ser­va­tion
of the manner in which patronage is usually dispensed does
not lead to the conclusion that its exercise is always free from
the influence of corrupt motives.  Even in the cases in
which such impure motives seem absent, it too frequently
happens that other influences beside a just and honest discrimination
appear to have taken a part in regulating the
distribution of public favour. It would be invidious to speculate
on the motives or discuss the merits of the appointments
to which I have had occasion to refer: with their propriety
or otherwise I have individually no concern: of the positive
motives which induced them I have no knowledge, at least
not sufficient to justify me in condemning them on that score.
But I cannot help thinking that such appointments have not
always been made without some degree of pain or misgiving,
and perhaps a conscientious scruple on the part of the Minister;
indeed I have sometimes indulged a suspicion that a
little firmness to resist external pressure would oc­ca­sion­al­ly
secure more fairness to candidates for public employment,
and tend to retain the services of more efficient agents of the
public weal.
〈THE WEIGHT OF NEPOTISM.〉
</div></body></text></TEI>