<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Passages from the Life of a Philosopher</title><author>Babbage, Charles (1791-1871)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, and Green</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1864</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="27">CHAPTER XXVII.
WIT.

Poor Dogs — Puns Double and
Triple — History of the Silver
Lady — Disappointed by the Milliner — The
Phi­los­o­pher performs her functions — Lady Morgan’s
Criticism — Allsop’s Beer — Sydney
Smith — Toss up a Bishop — Lady
M . . . and the Gipsy in Spain — Epigram
on the Planet Neptune — Epigram on Henry Drummond’s
attack upon Catholics in the House of Commons — On
Catholic Miracles.
IT
has often struck me that an analysis of the causes of
wit would be a very interesting subject of inquiry. With that
view I collected many jest-books, but fortunately in this one
instance I had resolution to abstain from distracting my attention
from more important inquiries.
I may, however, note some illustrations of it which occur
to my memory. The late Sir Harris Nicolas used to practice
rather strongly upon some of his friends. I was not an unwilling
victim. The pleasure derived from the wit far
exceeded any pain it inflicted. Indeed, Sir Harris himself
one day expressed his disappointment at my insensibility, by
saying that he had never in his whole life been able really to
hit me.
The late Lord S . . . . was sitting with him one morning
listening to a very astute but rather dry explanation of some
matter about which his Lordship had inquired. At last he
threw himself back in his arm-chair and said, “My dear
Nicolas, I am very stupid this morning: my
brains are all {364}
gone to the dogs.” On which Sir Harris pathetically exclaimed,—“Poor
dogs!”
It is evident in this case, that the wit of the reply arose
from sympathy expressed on the wrong side. The peer expected
sympathy from the knight: but the knight gave it to
the dogs.
Another remarkable feature of jokes formed upon this principle
is, that they generally depend upon the intimate meaning
of the words employed, and not either upon their sound
or their arrangement; consequently, they possess the rare
quality of being translatable into all languages.
One of the principles of discovery in many subjects is,
to generalize from the individual case up to the species, and
thence to descend to other individual instances.
〈A TRIPLE PUN.〉
Puns are detestable. The greater number of them depend
on the double meaning of the same word, or on the similar
pronunciation of words differently spelt. The following may
serve as an example of a triple pun:—
A gentleman calling one morning at the house of a lady
whose sister was remarkably beautiful, found her at the
writing-table. Putting his hand upon the little bell used for
calling the attendant, he inquired of the lady of the house
what relationship existed between his walking-stick, her sister,
and the instrument under his finger.
His walking-stick was
{cane, Cain}
the brother of 
{a bell,
 a belle,
 Abel}.
I mentioned, in an early chapter, my boyish admiration of
an automaton in the shape of a silver lady, who attitudinized
in the most graceful manner. Her fate was singular: at the
death of her maker she was sold with the rest
of his collection {365}
of mechanical toys, and was purchased by Weekes, who had a
mechanical exhibition in Cockspur Street. No attempt appears
to have been made to finish the automaton; and it
seems to have been placed out of the way in an attic uncovered
and utterly neglected.
〈THE SILVER LADY.〉
On the sale by auction of Weeke’s Museum, I met again
the object of my early admiration. Having purchased the
silver figure, I proceeded to take to pieces the whole of the
mechanism, and found a multitude of small holes which had
been stopped up as not having fulfilled their intended object.
In fact, it appeared tolerably certain that scarcely any
drawings could have been prepared for the automaton, but
that the beautiful result arose from a system of continual
trials.
I myself repaired and restored all the mechanism of the
Silver Lady, by which title she was afterwards known to my
friends. I placed her under a glass case on a pedestal in my
drawing-room, where she received, in her own silent but graceful
manner, those valued friends who so frequently honoured
me with their society on certain Saturday evenings.
This piece of mechanism formed a striking contrast with the
unfinished portion of the Difference Engine, No. 1, which
was placed in the adjacent room: the whole of the latter
mechanism existed in drawings upon paper before any portion
of it was put together.
The external surface of the figure, which was beautiful in
form, was made of silver. It was, therefore, necessary to
supply her with robes suitable to her station. This would
have been rather difficult for a phi­los­o­pher, but it was made
easy by the aid of one or two of my fair friends who kindly
intervened. These generously assisted with their own peculiar
skill and taste at the toilette of
their rival Syren. {366}
Sketches were made and modists of the purest water were
employed. The result was, upon the whole, highly sat­is­fac­tory.
One evening, however, the arrival of the new dress
was postponed to so late a period, that I feared it had entirely
escaped the recollection of the executive department. The
hour at which my friends usually arrived was rapidly approaching.
In this difficulty it occurred to me that there were a few
remnants of beautiful Chinese crape in the silver lady’s wardrobe.
Having selected two strips, one of pink and the other
of light green, I hastily wound a platted band of bright auburn
hair round the block on which her head-dresses were usually
constructed, and then pinned on the folds of coloured crape.
This formed a very tolerable turban, and was not much unlike
a kind of head-dress called a toke, which prevailed at
that period. Another larger piece of the same pink Chinese
crape I wound round her person, which I thought showed
it off to considerable advantage. Fortunately, I found in
her wardrobe a pair of small pink satin slippers, on each of
which I fixed a single silver spangle: then placing a small
silver crescent in the front of her turban, I felt I had accomplished
all that time and circumstances permitted.
〈LADY MORGAN’S CRITICISM.〉
The criticisms on the costume of the Silver Lady were
various. In the course of the evening, Lady Morgan communicated
to me confidentially her own opinion of the dress.
Holding up her fan, she whispered, “My dear Mr. Babbage,
I think your Silver Lady is rather slightly clad to-night; shall
I lend her a petticoat?” to which I replied, “My dear Lady
Morgan, I am much indebted for your very considerate offer,
but I fear you have not got one to spare.”
This retort was not a pun, but merely a “double-entendre.”
It might mean either that her Ladyship had
on invisibles, but {367}
not enough to be able to spare one: or it might imply that,
having no garment of that kind, she was unable to lend one
to a friend.
About the time of the attempt to assassinate the Emperor
of the French by Orsini, an Englishman named Alsop was
arrested in London, and afterwards tried and acquitted of a
connection with the assassins.
〈ALLSOP’S BEER.〉
At a distinguished dinner-party, amongst whom was the
Attorney-General of that day, there arose a question as to
who Mr. Alsop was. One of the company asked, “Whether it
was Allsop’s beer?” meaning, whether the prisoner was the
concoctor of that delightful beverage. The gentleman to
whom the question was addressed, immediately replied, “It
is not at present Allsop’s beer, but,” said he, turning to the
Attorney-General, “if your prosecution succeeds, it is very
likely to become Alsop’s bier.”
Sydney Smith oc­ca­sion­al­ly called upon me in the morning,
and was ever a most welcome visitor. The conversation
usually commenced upon grave subjects, and I was always
desirous of profiting by the light his powerful mind threw upon
the most difficult questions.
When railways first came into existence much reasonable
alarm arose from the rapidity of the trains and the immense
masses of matter in motion. One morning my friend called
and asked my opinion on the subject. I pointed out what
then appeared to me the chief sources of danger, and entered
upon some of the precautions to be attended to, and of remedies
to be applied.
Sydney Smith then asked me why I did not go and inform
the Government of the danger and of the means of remedying
it. My answer was, that such a mission would be a pure
waste of time, that nothing whatever would
be done until {368}
some great man, a prime minister for instance, were smashed.
I then continued, “Perhaps a bishop or two would do; for
you know,” said I, looking slyly at my friend, “they are so
much better prepared for the change than we are.”
I have heard this view of the subject assigned to Sydney
Smith. It is very probable that it should have occurred to
him, although I scarcely imagine he would have given the
reason I did for the preference. His celebrated suggestion to
the person who asked him how a man could find which way the
wind blew when there was no weathercock in sight,51
adds to
the probability of Sydney Smith’s originality. On the other
hand, I may support my own pretensions to independent invention
by referring to a parallel remark I made many years
before:—

51
Toss up a bishop.
〈OPINION ON DUELLING.〉
At a large dinner party the subject of duelling was discussed.
Various opinions were propounded as to its absolute
necessity. I had made no remark upon the question, but
during a slight pause somebody on the opposite side of the
table asked my opinion on the subject. My reply was,
I always wished that the injured man should fall. On
being asked my reason for that wish, I answered, “Because
he is so much better prepared for the change than the wrong-doer.”
I afterwards learned, with great sat­is­fac­tion, that
when the ladies retired to the drawing-room, the discussion
was much criticized and my reply highly applauded.
The late Lady M.........., having a great desire to see
Mr. Borrow, asked me to invite him to one of my Saturday
evening parties. I expressed my regret that, not having
the pleasure of his acquaintance, I was unable to ask him to
my house, as I never made “lions” of my guests.
A short time after, a friend who was coming to me on the
{369}
following Saturday, called to ask me to allow him to
bring Mr. Borrow who dined with him on that day, to my
party in the evening. Of course, I willingly gave the invitation,
and then wrote a note to inform Lady M..........
of the occurrence of the opportunity she wished for.
On the following Saturday evening Lady M.......... was
announced, and immediately asked me whether Mr. Borrow
had arrived. I said that he had, and that he was in the
further room. I then added, that in the course of a few
moments I should have great pleasure in presenting to her
Mr. Borrow.
Lady M.........., who had several other engagements that
evening, said, “Only tell me what sort of a person he is,
and I will go and find him out myself.”
I observed that he was a remarkably tall, straggling person,
with a very intelligent countenance. With these in­struc­tions
her ladyship left me, and finding, as she imagined, exactly
the man I had described, immediately accosted him. The
conversation was highly interesting, and included a great
variety of widely different subjects. It concluded by Lady
M.......... expressing her delight with her new acquaintance,
from whom she parted with this remark, “What a
delightful gipsying life you must have led!”
〈A SLIGHT MISTAKE.〉
A slight mistake had, however, occurred, which was not
discovered until long after: the person thus addressed
was not Mr. Borrow, but Dr. Whately, the Archbishop of
Dublin.
In this chapter may be placed one or two epigrams which,
though upon subjects of transitory interest, may amuse those
who are acquainted with the attending circumstances.
It will be remembered that great discussion arose about
the conflicting claims of Adams and Le
Verrier to the {370}
discovery of the planet Neptune. A great controversy resulted,
which was at last summed up in the following couplet:—

“When
 Airy was told, he wouldn’t believe it;
When Challis saw, he couldn’t perceive it.”

〈WINKING STATUES.〉
The clever and eccentric member for East Surrey, the late
Henry Drummond, who founded a professorship of Political
Economy at Oxford, made in the House of Commons a most
amusing, though rather strong speech against the modern
miracles of the Roman Catholic Church, in which he spoke
of “their bleeding pictures, their winking statues, and the
Virgin’s milk.” On this some profane wag wrote the following
couplet:—

“Sagacious
 Drummond, explain, with your divinity:
Why reject the milk, yet swallow the virginity?”

Probably some clever fellow of that faith was at the bottom
of this mischief; for I have observed that the cleverest fellows
seem to think that the merit of adhering to a cause entitles
them to the right of quizzing it.
</div></body></text></TEI>