<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Passages from the Life of a Philosopher</title><author>Babbage, Charles (1791-1871)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, and Green</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1864</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="33">CHAPTER XXXIII.
THE AUTHOR’S CONTRIBUTIONS TO HUMAN KNOWLEDGE.

Scientific Societies — Analytical
Society — Astronomical Society — Grand
Duke of Tuscany, Leopold II. — Scientific Meeting
at Florence — Also at Berlin — At
Edinburgh — At Cambridge — Origin of
the Statistical Society — Statistical Congress at
Brussels — Calculus of Functions — Division
of Labour — Verification part of
Cost — Principles of Taxation — Extension
to Elections — The two
Pumps — Monopoly — Miracles.
Of the part taken by the Author in the formation of various
Scientific Societies.
THE origin of the
Analytical Society has been already explained in the fourth chapter.
In the year 1820 the Author of this volume, joining with several
eminent men attached to astronomical pursuits, instituted the Royal
Astronomical Society. At the present time only three of the original
founders survive. The meetings, and still more the publications of that
society, have contributed largely to extend the taste for astronomy.
In 1827 I visited Italy, and during my residence at
Florence had many opportunities of observing the strong
feeling of the reigning Grand Duke Leopold II., not only for
the fine arts, but for the progress of science, and for its application
to the advancement of the arts of life.
〈THE GRAND DUKE OF TUSCANY.〉
After a long tour in Italy, I found myself in the following
year again in Florence, and again I was received with a kindness
and consideration which I can never
forget. The Grand {431}
Duke was anxious to know my opinion respecting the state of
science in Italy. At one of the many interviews with which
I was honoured, he asked me whether I could point out any
way in which he could assist its progress.
The question was unexpected; but it immediately recalled
to me a recent circumstance, which I then mentioned, namely,
that in three of the great cities of Italy I had been consulted
confidentially by three distinguished men of science upon the
same subject, on which each was separately engaged without
being aware of the fact that the other two were employed on
the same inquiry. The result, I remarked, would probably be
that Italy would thus make one step in science, and that the
discovery might probably be accompanied by painful discussions
respecting priority; whilst with better means of intercommunication
amongst its men of science Italy might have
made three steps in advance. The idea of a periodical meeting
of men engaged in scientific pursuits naturally arose out
of these remarks. At parting, the Grand Duke requested me
to draw up a minute of the conversation. I therefore drew
up a note on the subject, in which I shadowed out an annual
meeting of learned men in the various cities of Italy.
On finally taking leave, previous to my visit to Germany,
the Grand Duke assured me that he had read the minute of
our conversation with much attention, that he saw the evils
pointed out, and agreed with me as to the remedy. He then
observed that “the time for such a meeting had not yet
arrived; but,” added the Grand Duke, “when it does arrive,
you may depend upon me.”
Eleven years after, in 1839, I was honoured by an invitation
from the Grand Duke of Tuscany to meet the men of science
of Italy, then about to assemble at Florence. In this communication
it was observed, that “the time
had now arrived.” {432}
In the autumn of 1828 I reached Berlin, and unexpectedly
found, from M. Humboldt, that in the course of a few weeks
the phi­los­o­phers of Germany were to hold a meeting in that
capital.
I then learnt for the first time that, some years before,
Dr. Oken had proposed and organized an annual congress of
German naturalists, meeting in each succeeding year in some
great town.
I remained to witness the enlarged meeting at Berlin,
which was very successful, and wrote an account of it to
Sir D. Brewster, who published the description of it in “The
Edinburgh Journal of Science.”58
This was, I believe, the first
communication to the English public of the existence of the
German Society.
〈BRITISH ASSOCIATION: ITS ORIGIN.〉
A few years after, Sir David Brewster, Sir John Robison,
Secretary of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and the Rev.
William Vernon Harcourt, undertook the foundation of a
similar periodical and itinerant society in our own country.
It appeared to me that the original organization of the
British Association, as developed at York and at Oxford, was
defective,—that its basis was not sufficiently extended. In
fact, that other sciences besides the physical were wanting for
the harmony and success of the whole. There was no section
to interest the landed proprietors or those members of their
families who sat in either house of parliament. Nor was
there much to attract the man­u­fac­turer or the retail dealer.
A purely accidental circumstance enabled me to remedy one
of these defects.59
{433}

58
Vol. x., p. 225. 1829.
59
I afterwards succeeded in getting the British Association
to adopt the plan of having an exhibition of specimens of the various
man­u­fac­tures and commercial products of the districts it successively
visited. This commenced at Newcastle in 1838, and was carried to a much
greater extent in
the following year at Birmingham. I am not aware that this
fact was ever referred to by those who got up the Exhibition of 1851.
〈THE STATISTICAL SOCIETY: ITS ORIGIN.〉
At the Third Meeting of the British Association at Cambridge
in 1833, I happened, one afternoon, to call on my old
and valued friend the Rev. Richard Jones, Professor of Political
Economy at Haileybury, who was then residing in apartments
at Trinity College. He informed me that he had just had
a long conversation with our mutual friend M. Quételet, who
had been sent officially by the Belgian Government to attend
the meeting of the British Association. That M. Quételet
had brought with him a budget of statistical facts, and that
as there was no place for it in any section, he (Professor
Jones) had asked M. Quételet to come to him that evening,
and had invited Sir Charles Lemon, Professor Malthus,
Mr. Drinkwater (afterwards Mr. Bethune),60
and one or two
others interested in the subject, to meet him, at the same
time requesting me to join the party. I gladly accepted
this invitation and departed. I had not, however, reached the
gate of Trinity College before it occurred to me that there
was now an opportunity of doing good service to the British
Association. I returned to the apartments of my friend,
explained to him my views, in which he fully coincided, and
I suggested the formation of a Statistical Section. We both
agreed that unless some unusual course were taken, it would be
impossible to get such a Section organized until the meeting
in the following year. I therefore proposed that when we
met in the evening we should consider the question of constituting
ourselves provisionally a Statistical Section, and afterwards,
at the general meeting in the Senate House, that I
should explain the circumstance which had arisen, and the
{434}
great advantage to the British Association of rendering such a
Section a permanent branch of its institution. After further
explanations its utility was fully admitted; certain rather
stringent rules were laid down in order to confine its inquiries
to collections of facts. The sanction of the General Meeting
was then given to the establishment of the Statistical Section,
and before the termination of the Congress, a larger audience
was collected in its meeting-room than in those of any of its
sister sciences.

60
I have reason to believe, from the Note Book of Mr.
Drinkwater (Bethune), that this meeting was held on Wednesday, 26th
June, 1833.
The interest of our discussions, and the mass of materials
which now began to open upon our view, naturally indicated
the necessity of forming a more permanent society for their
collection. The British Association approved of the appointment
of a permanent committee of this section. I was requested
to act as chairman, and Mr. Drinkwater as secretary.
On the 15th March, 1834, at a public meeting held in London,
the Marquis of Lansdowne in the Chair, it was resolved to
establish the Statistical Society of London.
The Committee of the British Association, in reporting this
fact to the Council, observe that “though the want of such a
society has been long felt and acknowledged, the successful
establishment of it, after every previous attempt had failed,
has been due altogether to the impulse given by the last
meeting of the Association. The distinguished foreigner
(M. Quételet) who contributed so materially to the formation
of the Statistical Section, was attracted to England principally
with a view of attending that meeting; and the Committee
hail this as a signal instance of the beneficial results
to be expected from that personal intercourse among the
enlightened men of all countries, which it is a principal
object of the British Association to encourage and facilitate.”
M. Quételet, on his return to his own
country, continued to {435}
direct by his counsel, and to advance, by his own indefatigable
industry, those statistical inquiries of which the Belgian
Government so well appreciated the advantage.
At length the conviction of the importance of the value of
Statistical Science becoming widely extended in other countries,
M. Quételet saw that a fit time had arrived for summoning
a European Congress. The results of such meetings are
invaluable to all sciences, but more peculiarly to statistics, in
which names have to be defined, signs to be invented, methods
of ob­ser­va­tion to be compared and rendered uniform; thus
enhancing the value of all future ob­ser­va­tions by making them
more comparable as well as more expeditiously collected.
The proposal was adopted by the Belgian Government, and
the first International Statistical Congress was held at Brussels
in September, 1853.
The result was most successful; all the cultivators of Statistical
Science are deeply indebted to M. Quételet for the
unwearied pains he took to insure its success. He was assisted
in this arduous task by the ministers of the crown, and supported
by the high approbation of an enlightened sovereign.

Calculus of Functions.
This was my earliest step, and is still one to which I would
willingly recur if other demands on my time permitted.
Many years ago I recorded, in a small MS. volume, the facts,
and also extracts of letters from Herschel, Bromhead, and
Maule, in which I believe I have done justice to my friends
if not to myself. It is very remarkable that the Analytical
Engine adapts itself with singular facility to the development
and numerical working out of this vast department of analysis.
</div></body></text></TEI>