<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Passages from the Life of a Philosopher</title><author>Babbage, Charles (1791-1871)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, and Green</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1864</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="15">CHAPTER XV.
EXPERIENCE BY WATER.

Shooting Sea-birds — Walking on the
Water — A Screw being loose — The
Author nearly drowned — Ad­ven­ture in the Thames
Tunnel — Descent in a Diving-bell — Plan
for Sub­ma­rine Nav­i­ga­tion.
THE grounds
surrounding my father’s house, near Teignmouth, extended to the sea.
The cliffs, though lofty, admitted at one point of a descent to the
beach, of which I very frequently availed myself for the purpose of
bathing. One Christmas when I was about sixteen I determined to see if
I could manage a gun. I accordingly took my father’s fowling-piece, and
climbing with it down to the beach, I began to look about for the large
sea-birds which I thought I might have a chance of hitting.
I fired several charges in vain. At last, however, I was
fortunate enough to hit a sea-bird called a diver; but it fell
at some distance into the sea: I had no dog to get it out for
me; the sea was rough, and no boat was within reach; also it
was snowing.
So I took advantage of a slight recess in the rock to protect
my clothes from the snow, undressed, and swam out after my
game, which I succeeded in capturing. The next day, having
got the cook to roast it, I tried to eat it; but this was by no
means an agreeable task, so for the future I left the sea-birds
to the quiet possession of
their own dominion. {206}
〈WALKING IN THE WATER.〉
Shortly after this, whilst residing on the beautiful banks of
the Dart, I constantly indulged in swimming in its waters.
One day an idea struck me, that it was possible, by the aid of
some simple mechanism, to walk upon the water, or at least
to keep in a vertical position, and have head, shoulders, and
arms above water.
My plan was to attach to each foot two boards closely connected
together by hinges themselves fixed to the sole of the
shoe. My theory was, that in lifting up my leg, as in the act
of walking, the two boards would close up towards each
other; whilst on pushing down my foot, the water would rush
between the boards, cause them to open out into a flat surface,
and thus offer greater resistance to my sinking in the water.
I took a pair of boots for my experiment, and cutting up
a couple of old useless volumes with very thick binding, I
fixed the boards by hinges in the way I proposed. I placed
some obstacle between the two flaps of each book to prevent
them from approaching too nearly to each other so as to
impede their opening by the pressure of the water.
I now went down to the river, and thus prepared, walked
into the water. I then struck out to swim as usual, and
found little difficulty. Only it seemed necessary to keep the
feet farther apart. I now tried the grand experiment. For
a time, by active exertion of my legs, I kept my head and
shoulders above water and sometimes also my arms. I was
now floating down the river with the receding tide, sustained
in a vertical position with a very slight exertion of force.
But unfortunately one pair of my hinges got out of order,
and refused to perform its share of the propulsion. The
result was that I became lop-sided. I was therefore obliged
to swim, which I now did with considerable exertion; but
another difficulty soon occurred,—the
instrument on the {207}
disabled side refused to do its share in propelling me. The
tide was rapidly carrying me down the river; my own exertions
alone would have made me revolve in a small circle,
consequently I was obliged to swim in a spiral. It was very
difficult to calculate the curve I was describing upon the
surface of the water, and still more so to know at what point,
if at any, I might hope to reach its banks again. I became
very much fatigued by my efforts, and endeavoured to relieve
myself for a time by resuming the vertical position.
After floating, or rather struggling for some time, my feet
at last touched the bottom. With some difficulty and much
exertion I now gained the bank, on which I lay down in a
state of great exhaustion.
This experiment satisfied me of the danger as well as of
the practicability of my plan, and ever after, when in the
water, I preferred trusting to my own unassisted powers.
〈DANGER IN THE THAMES TUNNEL.〉
At the close of the year 1827, as I anticipated a long
absence from England, I paid a visit to the Thames Tunnel,
in the construction of which I took a great interest. My
eldest son, then about twelve years of age, accompanied me
in this visit. I fortunately found the younger Brunel at the
works, who kindly took us with him into the workings.
We stood upon a timber platform, distant about fifty feet
from the shield, which was full of busy workmen, each actively
employed in his own cell. As we were conversing together,
I observed some commotion in the upper cell on the right
hand side. From its higher corner there entered a considerable
stream of liquid mud. Brunel ran directly to the shield
a line of workmen was instantly formed, and whatever tools
or timber was required was immediately conveyed to the spot.
〈ON THE PROPER TIME FOR RUNNING AWAY.〉
I observed the progress with some anxiety, since but a
short time before a similar occurrence had
been the prelude {208}
to the inundation of the whole tunnel. I remained watching
the fit time, if necessary, to run away; but also noticing what
effect the apparent danger had on my son. After a short
time it was clear that the ingress of liquid mud had been
checked, and in a few minutes more Brunel returned to me,
having this time succeeded in stopping up the breach. I then
inquired what was really the nature of the danger we had
escaped. Brunel told me that unless himself or Gravatt had
been present, the whole tunnel would in less than ten minutes
have been full of water. The next day I embarked for
Holland, and in about a week after I read in Galignani’s
newspaper, that the Thames had again broken into the
tunnel; that five or six of the workmen had been drowned,
and that Brunel himself had escaped with great difficulty by
swimming.
In 1818, during a visit to Plymouth, I had an opportunity
of going down in a diving-bell: I was accompanied by two
friends and the usual director of that machine.
The diving-bell in which I descended was a cast-iron vessel
about six feet long by four feet and a half wide, and five feet
eight inches high. In the top of the bell there were twelve
circular apertures, each about six inches in diameter, filled by
thick plate-glass fixed by water-tight cement. Exactly in
the centre there were a number of small holes through which
the air was continually pumped in from above.
At the ends of the bell are two seats, placed at such a
height, that the top of the head is but a few inches below the
top of the bell; these will conveniently hold two persons
each. Exactly in the middle of the bell, and about six
inches above its lower edge, is placed a narrow board, on
which the feet of the divers rest. On one side, nearly on a
level with the shoulders, is a small shelf, with
a ledge to {209}
contain a few tools, chalk for writing messages, and a ring to
which a small rope is tied. A board is connected with this
rope; and after writing any orders on the board with a piece
of chalk, on giving it a pull, the superintendent above, round
whose arm the other end of the rope is fastened, will draw it
up to the surface, and, if necessary, return an answer by the
same conveyance.
In order to enter the bell, it is raised about three or four
feet above the surface of the water; and the boat, in which
the persons who propose descending are seated, is brought
immediately under it; the bell is then lowered, so as to
enable them to step upon the foot-board within it; and
having taken their seats, the boat is removed, and the bell
gradually descends to the water.
〈SENSATIONS IN A DIVING-BELL.〉
On touching the surface, and thus cutting off the communication
with the external air, a peculiar sensation is perceived
in the ears; it is not, however, painful. The attention
is soon directed to another object. The air rushing in
through the valve at the top of the bell overflows, and
escapes with a considerable bubbling noise under the sides.
The motion of the bell proceeds slowly, and almost imperceptibly;
and, on looking at the glass lenses close to the
head, when the top of the machine just reaches the surface of
the water, it may be perceived, by means of the little impurities
which float about in it, flowing into the recesses containing
the glasses. A pain now begins to be felt in the ears,
arising from the increased external pressure; this may sometimes
be removed by the act of yawning, or by closing the
nostrils and mouth, and attempting to force air through the
ears. As soon as the equilibrium is established the pain
ceases, but recommences almost immediately by the continuance
of the descent. On returning, the
same sensation of {210}
pain is felt in the ears; but it now arises from the dense air
which had filled them endeavouring, as the pressure is removed,
to force its way out.
〈OBSERVATION IN DIVING BELL.〉
If the water is clear, and not much disturbed, the light in
the bell is very considerable; and, even at the depth of twenty
feet, was more than is usual in many sitting-rooms. Within
the distance of eight or ten feet, the stones at the bottom
began to be visible. The pain in the ears still continues to
occur at intervals, until the descent of the bell terminates by
its resting on the ground. The light is sufficient, after passing
through twenty feet of sea water, even for delicate experiments;
and a far less quantity is enough for the work which
is usually performed in those situations.
The temperatures of the hand and of the mouth, under the
tongue, were measured by a thermometer, but they did not
seem to differ from those which had been determined by the
same instrument previous to the descent; at least, the difference
did not amount to one-sixth of a degree of Fahrenheit’s
scale. The pulse was more frequent.
A small magnetic needle did not appear to have entirely
lost its directive power, when placed on the footboard in the
middle of the bell; but its direction was not the same as that
which it indicated on shore. This was determined by directing,
by means of signals, the workmen above to move the
bell in the direction of one of the co-ordinates; a stick then
being pressed against the bottom drew a line parallel to that
co-ordinate, its direction by compass was ascertained in the
bell, and the direction of the co-ordinate was determined on
returning to the surface after leaving the bell.
Signals are communicated by the workmen in the bell to
those above, by striking against the side of the bell with a
hammer. Those most frequently wanted
are indicated by {211}
the fewest number of blows; thus a single stroke is to require
more air. The sound is heard very distinctly by those above;
but, it must be confessed, that to persons unaccustomed to it,
the force with which a weighty hammer is driven against so
brittle a material as cast iron is a little alarming.
After ascending a few inches from the bottom, the air in
the bell became slightly obscured. At the distance of a few
feet this appearance increased. Before it had half reached
the surface, it was evident that the whole atmosphere it contained
was filled with a mist or cloud, which at last began to
condense in large drops on the whole of the internal surface.
The explanation of this phenomenon seems to be, that on
the rising of the bell the pressure on the air within being
diminished by a weight equal to several feet of water, it began
to expand; and some portion of it escaping under the edges
of the bell, reduced the temperature of that which remained
so much, that it was unable to retain, in the state of invisible
vapour, the water which it had previously held in solution.
Thus the same principle which constantly produces clouds in
the atmosphere filled the diving-bell with mist.
〈SUBMARINE NAVIGATION.〉
This first led me to consider the much more extensive
question of submarine navigation. I was aware that Fulton
had already descended in a diving-vessel, and remained under
water during several hours. He also carried down a copper
sphere containing one cubic foot of space into which he had
forced two hundred atmospheres. With these means he
remained under water and moved about at pleasure during
four hours.
〈OPEN SUBMARINE VESSEL.〉
But a closed vessel is obviously of little use for the most
important purposes to which submarine navigation would be
applied in case of war. In the article Diving Bell, published
in 1826, in the ‘Encyclopedia Metropolitana,’
I gave a {212}
description and drawings of an open submarine vessel which
would contain sufficient air for the consumption of four persons
during more than two days. A few years ago, I understand,
experiments were made in the Seine at Paris, on a
similar kind of open diving-vessel. Such a vessel could be
propelled by a screw, and might enter, without being suspected,
any harbour, and place any amount of explosive
matter under the bottoms of ships at anchor.
</div></body></text></TEI>