<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Passages from the Life of a Philosopher</title><author>Babbage, Charles (1791-1871)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, and Green</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1864</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="30">CHAPTER XXX.
RELIGION.


“Before
 thy holy altar, sacred Truth,
I bow in manhood, as I knelt in youth;
There let me bend till this frail form decay,
And my last accents hail thine opening day.”


The à priori proof of the existence of a Deity — Proof
from Revelation — Dr. Johnson’s definition of
Inspiration — Various Meanings assigned to the
word ‘Revelation’ — Illustration of trans­mit­ted
Testimony — The third source of proof of the
existence of a Deity — By an examination of His
Works — Effect of hearing the Athanasian Creed read for
the first time.
THERE
are three sources from which it is stated that man can
arrive at the knowledge of the existence of a Deity.

1. The à priori or metaphysical proof. Such is that of
Dr. Samuel Clarke.
2. From Revelation.
3. From the examination of the works of the Creator.
1. The first of these, the à priori proof, is of such a nature
that it can only be apprehended in a high state of civilization,
and then only by the most in­tel­lec­tual. Even amongst that
very limited class it does not, as an argument, command
universal assent.
2. The argument deduced from revelation is advanced in
many countries and for several different
forms of faith. {397}
When it is sincerely adopted it deserves the most respectful
examination. It must, however, on the other hand, be submitted
to the most scrutinizing inquiry. As long as the
believer in any form of revelation maintains it by evidence or
by argument, it is only by such means that it ought to be
questioned.
〈WILFUL ABUSE OF LANGUAGE.〉
When, however, professed believers dare to throw doubt
upon the motives of those whose arguments they are unable
to refute, and still more, when, availing themselves of the
imperfections of language, they apply to their opponents
epithets which they can defend in one sense but know will
be interpreted in another—when they speak of an adversary
as a disbeliever, because, though he believes in the same
general revelation, he doubts the accuracy of certain texts,
or believes in a different interpretation of others—when they
apply the term infidel, meaning thereby a disbelief in their
own view of revelation, but knowing that it will be understood
as disbelief in a Deity,—then it is at least allowable to
remind them that they are richly paid for the support of their
own doctrines, whilst those they revile have no such motives
to influence or to mislead their judgment.
Before, however, we enter upon that great question it is
necessary to observe that belief is not a voluntary operation.
Belief is the result of the influence of a greater or less preponderance
of evidence acting upon the human mind.
It ought also to be remarked that the word revelation
assumes, as a fact, that a Being exists from whom it proceeds;
whilst, on the other hand, the existence of a Deity is
possible without any revelation.
〈INSPIRATION.〉
The first question that arises is the meaning of the word
revelation. In its ordinary acceptation it is said to be a
direct communication from the Deity to
an individual human {398}
being. Dr. Johnson remarks:—“Inspiration is when an
overpowering impression of any propositions is made upon
the mind by God himself, that gives a convincing and
indubitable evidence of the truth and divinity of it.” Be
it so; but then, as such, it is not revelation to any other
human being. All others receive it from the statement of
the person to whom the revelation was vouchsafed. To all
others its truth depends entirely on human testimony. Now
in a certain sense all our faculties being directly given to
us by the Supreme Being might be said to be revelations.
But this is clearly not the religious meaning of the word. In
the latter sense it is a direct special communication of knowledge
to one or more persons which is not given to the rest
of the race.
Before any person can admit the truth of a revelation
asserted by another, he must have clearly established in his
own mind what evidence he would require to believe in a
special revelation to himself.
But when he communicates this revelation to his fellow-creatures
that which may truly be a revelation to him is not
revelation to them. It is to them merely human testimony,
which they are bound to examine more strictly from its abnormal
nature.
Let us now suppose that this believer in his own special
revelation offers to work a miracle in proof of the truth of his
doctrine, and even, further, that he does perform a miracle.
Those who witness it have now before them far higher evidence
of inspiration than that of the prophet’s testimony.
They have the evidence of their own senses that an act contrary
to the ordinary laws of nature has been performed.
But even here the amount of conviction will be influenced
by the state of knowledge the spectator
of the miracle {399}
himself possesses of the laws of nature which he believes he has
thus seen violated.54
〈REVELATION.〉
Granting him, however, the most profound knowledge, the
evidence influencing his own mind will be inferior to that
which acts upon the mind of the inspired worker of the
miracle. If there are more witnesses than one thus qualified,
this will to a certain extent augment the evidence, although
a large number might not give it a proportional addition of
weight.

54
I have adopted in the text that view of the nature of
miracles which prevailed many years ago. In 1838, I published, in
the “Ninth Bridgewater Treatise,” my own views on those important
subjects—the nature of miracles and of prophecy. Those opinions have
been received and adopted by many of the most profound thinkers of very
different religious opinions.
It would be profane to compare evidence derived directly
from the Almighty, which must necessarily be irresistible,
with the testimony of man, which must always be carefully
weighed by taking into account the state of his knowledge,
his prejudices, his interests, and his truthfulness. On the
other hand, it would lead to endless confusion, and be destructive
to all reasoning on the subject, to apply the same word
‘Revelation’ to things so different in their nature as—

The immediate act of the Deity.
The impression produced by that act on the mind of
the person inspired.
The description of it given by him in the language of
the people he addressed.
The record made of his description by those who
heard it.
The transmission of this through various languages
and people to the present day.
We have now arrived at the highest external evidence man
can have—the declaration of inspiration
by the prophet, {400}
supported by an admitted miracle performed before competent
witnesses, to prove the truth of his inspiration.
〈TRANSMITTED TESTIMONY.〉
But to all who were not present, the evidence of this is
entirely dependent on the truth and even upon the accuracy
of human testimony.
At every step of its transmission it undergoes some variation
in the words in which it is related; and without the
least want of good faith at any stage, the mere imperfection
of language will necessarily vary the terms by which it is
described. Even when written language has conveyed it to
paper as a MSS., there may be several different manuscripts
by different persons. Even in the extraordinary case of two
MSS. agreeing perfectly there remains a perpetual source of
doubt as to the exact interpretation arising from the continually
fluctuating meaning of the words themselves.
Few persons who have not reflected deeply, or had a very
wide experience, are at all aware of the errors arising from
this source.
〈RUSSIAN SCANDAL.〉
There is a game oc­ca­sion­al­ly played in society which
eminently illustrates the value of testimony trans­mit­ted with
the most perfect good faith through a succession of truthful
persons. It is called Russian Scandal, and is thus played:—
One of the party writes a short simple tale, perhaps a
single anecdote. The original composer of the tale, whom we
will call A, retires into another room with B, to whom he
communicates it. A then returns to the party, and sends in
C, who is told by B the tale he had just learnt. B then
returns to the party and sends in D, who is informed of the
anecdote by C, and so on until the story has been trans­mit­ted
through twelve educated and truthful witnesses.
The twelfth then relates to the whole party the story he has
just heard: after that the original written
document is read. {401}
The wit or fun of the trans­mit­ted story is invariably gone,
and nothing but an unmeaning platitude generally remains.
One very interesting case occurred a few years ago in
which the wit of the original story had evidently been lost, but
had afterwards been revived in a different form in the latter
part of its transmission. The story at starting consisted of
the following anecdote:—
The Duke of Rutland and Theodore Hook having dined
with the Lord Mayor, were looking for their hats previously
to their departure. The Duke, unable to find his own, said to
his friend: “Hook, I have lost my castor.” The Lord Chief
Baron, Sir Frederick Pollock, was at that moment passing
down the stairs. Hook perceiving him, replied instantly,
“Never mind, take Pollock’s” (Pollux).
The story told at the conclusion, after a dozen transmissions,
was thus:—
Theodore Hook and the Duke of Rutland were dining with
the Bishop of Oxford. Both being equally incapable of finding
their respective hats, the Duke said to the wit, “Hook, you
have stolen my castor.” “No,” replied the prince of jokers,
“I haven’t stolen your castor, but I should have no objection
to take your beaver;” alluding to Belvoir Castle, the splendid
seat of the Duke of Rutland, which in the language of the
clay is pronounced precisely in the same way as the name of
that animal whom man robs of his great-coat in order to
make a covering for his own skull.
It requires considerable training to become an accurate
witness of facts. No two persons, however well trained, ever
express, in the same form of words, the series of facts they
have both observed.

〈THE BELIEF IN THE CREATOR FROM HIS WORKS.〉
3. There remains a third source from which
we arrive at {402}
the knowledge of the existence of a supreme Creator, namely,
from an examination of his works. Unlike trans­mit­ted testimony,
which is weakened at every stage, this evidence derives
confirmation from the progress of the individual as well as
from the advancement of the knowledge of the race.
Almost all thinking men who have studied the laws which
govern the animate and the inanimate world around us,
agree that the belief in the existence of one Supreme
Creator, possessed of infinite wisdom and power, is open to far
less difficulties than the supposition of the absence of any
cause, or of the existence of a plurality of causes.
In the works of the Creator ever open to our examination,
we possess a firm basis on which to raise the superstructure of
an enlightened creed. The more man inquires into the laws
which regulate the material universe, the more he is convinced
that all its varied forms arise from the action of a few
simple principles. These principles themselves converge, with
accelerating force, towards some still more comprehensive
law to which all matter seems to be submitted. Simple as
that law may possibly be, it must be remembered that it is
only one amongst an infinite number of simple laws: that
each of these laws has consequences at least as extensive as
the existing one, and therefore that the Creator who selected
the present law must have foreseen the consequences of all
other laws.
The works of the Creator, ever present to our senses, give a
living and perpetual testimony of his power and goodness far
surpassing any evidence trans­mit­ted through human testimony.
The testimony of man becomes fainter at every stage of transmission,
whilst each new inquiry into the works of the
Almighty gives to us more exalted views of his wisdom, his
goodness, and his power. {403}
〈THE ATHANASIAN CREED.〉
When I was between sixteen and seventeen years of age, I
heard, or rather I attended, for the first time, to the words of
the Athanasian Creed. I felt the utmost disgust at the direct
contradiction in terms which its words implied; and during
several weeks I recurred, at intervals, to the Prayer-Book to
assure myself that I rightly remembered its singular and self-contradictory
assertions. On inquiry amongst my seniors, I
was assured that it was all true, and that it was part of the
Christian religion, and that it was most wicked to doubt a
single sentence of it. Whereupon I was much alarmed,
seeing that I found it absolutely impossible to believe it, and
consequently, if it were an essential dogma, I clearly did not
belong to that faith.
In the course of my inquiries, I met with the work upon the
Trinity, by Dr. Samuel Clarke. This I carefully examined,
and although very far from being satisfied, I ceased from
further inquiry. This change arose probably from my having
acquired the much more valuable work of the same author,
on the Being and Attributes of God. This I studied, and felt
that its doctrine was much more intelligible and sat­is­fac­tory
than that of the former work. I may now state, as the result
of a long life spent in studying the works of the Creator, that
I am satisfied they afford far more sat­is­fac­tory and more convincing
proofs of the existence of a supreme Being than any
evidence trans­mit­ted through human testimony can possibly
supply.
If I were to express my opinion of the Athanasian Creed
merely from my experience of the motives and actions of
mankind, I should say that it was written by a clever, but
most unscrupulous person, who did not believe one syllable of
the doctrine,—that he purposely asserted and reiterated propositions
which contradict each other in terms,
in order that {404}
in after and more enlightened times, he should not be supposed
to have believed in the religion which he had, from
worldly motives, adopted.
The Athanasian Creed is a direct contradiction in terms:
if three things can be one thing, then the whole science of
arithmetic is at once annihilated, and those wonderful laws,
which, as astronomers have shown, govern the solar system, are
mere dreams. If, on the other hand, it is attempted to be
shown that there may be some mystic sense in which three
and one are the same thing, then all language through which
alone man can exert his reasoning faculty becomes useless,
because it contradicts itself and is untrue.55

55
See Appendix, Note B.
〈THE BASIS OF VIRTUE IS TRUTH.〉
The great basis of virtue in man is truth—that is, the constant
application of the same word to the same thing.
The first element of accurate knowledge is number—the
foundation and the measure of all he knows of the material
world.
I believe these views of the Athanasian Creed are by no
means singular,—that they are indeed very generally held,
although very rarely asserted. If such is the case, it were wise
to take the opportunity which the new Commission for the
revision of the Liturgy presents, to remove from the Rubric
doctrines so thoroughly destructive of all true religion, and
about which the author, doubtless in mockery, so complacently
tells us, that whosoever does not believe them “without
doubt, he shall perish everlastingly.”
The true value of the Christian religion rests, not upon
speculative views of the Creator, which must necessarily
be different in each individual, according to the extent of the
knowledge of the finite being, who employs his own feeble
powers in contemplating the infinite: but it
rests upon those {405}
doctrines of kindness and benevolence which that religion
claims and enforces, not merely in favour of man himself, but
of every creature susceptible of pain or of happiness.
〈IDENTITY DEPENDS ON MEMORY.〉
A curious reflection presents itself when we meditate upon
a state of rewards and punishments in a future life. We
must possess the memory of what we did during our existence
upon this earth in order to give them those char­ac­ter­is­tics.
In fact, memory seems to be the only faculty which must
of necessity be preserved in order to render a future state
possible.
If memory be absolutely destroyed, our personal identity is
lost.
Further reflection suggests that in a future state we may, as
it were, awake to the recollection that, previously to this our
present life, we existed in some former state, possibly in many
former ones, and that the then state of existence may have
been the consequences of our conduct in those former stages.
It would be a very interesting research if naturalists could
devise any means of showing that the dragon-fly, in its three
stages of a grub beneath the soil—an animal living in the
water—and that of a flying insect—had in the last stage any
memory of its existence in its first.
</div></body></text></TEI>