<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>Passages from the Life of a Philosopher</title><author>Babbage, Charles (1791-1871)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, and Green</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1864</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="20">CHAPTER XX.
THEATRICAL EXPERIENCE.

The Phi­los­o­pher in a Tableau at the Feet of
Beauty — Tableau encored — Phi­los­o­pher at
the Opera of ‘Don Juan’ — Visits the Water-works above
and the dark expanse below the Stage — Seized by two
Devils on their way up to fetch Juan — Cheated the Devils
by springing off to a beam at an infinite distance, just as his head
appeared to the Audience through the trap-door — The
Phi­los­o­pher writes a Ballet — Its
rehearsal — Its high moral tone — Its
rejection on the ground of the probable combustion of the
Opera-house.
I WAS never par­tic­u­lar­ly
devoted to theatrical rep­re­sen­ta­tions. Tragedy I disliked, and comedy,
which I enjoyed, frequently excited my feelings more than the dignity
of the philosophic character sanctioned. In fact, I could not stand the
reconciliation scenes.
I did, however, oc­ca­sion­al­ly, in one or two rare instances,
assist in a tableau. I still remember my delight when personating
a dead body, with my head towards the audience, I
lay motionless at the feet of three angels, entranced by their
beauty, and whose charms still fascinate my imagination, and
still retain their wonted power over my own sex.
We enacted the scene so admirably that our performance
was twice encored. But though thus “thrice slain,” the near
proximity of beauty speedily revived the ‘caput mortuum’
at its feet.
On one occasion having joined a party of friends in their
box at the opera of ‘Don Juan,’ I escaped, by
half a second, {252}
a marvellous adventure. Somewhat fatigued with the opera,
I went behind the scenes to look at the mechanism. One of
the scene-shifters of whom I had made an inquiry, found out
that I, like himself, was a workman. He immediately offered
to take me all over the theatre, and show me every part.
〈ADVENTURE AT THE OPERA.〉
We ascended to the roof to examine the ventilation, by
which, if stopped, the spectators, in case of accident or of a row,
might be suffocated. Also, the vast water-tanks by which,
in case of fire, they might be drowned. After long rambling
and descending endless steps, I found myself in a vast dark
and apparently boundless area; the flat wooden roof high
above my head was supported by upright timbers, some having
intermediate stages like large dissecting-tables. Here and
there three lamps, rivalling rushlights, made the obscurity
more visible, and the carpentry more in­com­pre­hen­sible.
Suddenly a little bell rang—the signal for my scene-shifting
friend to take his post. He pointed to one of the dismal
imitations of a rushlight, and said: “You see that light; on
its left is a door, go through that, and straight on until you
arrive at daylight.” Instantly my friend became invisible in
the surrounding gloom.
My first step when thus suddenly abandoned, was to mount
on a large oblong platform about six feet above the floor.
Here I was philosophically contemplating the surrounding
obscure vacuity, in order that I might fully “comprehend the
situation.”
Suddenly a flash of lightning occurred. On looking up,
high above my head I saw an opening as large as the platform
on which I stood. All there was brightness. Whilst I was
admiring this new light, and seeking my way to the upper and
outer world, two devils with long forked tails jumped upon the
platform, one
at each end. {253}
〈ESCAPE FROM THE DEVILS.〉
“What do you do here?” said Devil No. 1.
Before I could invent a decent excuse, Devil No. 2 exclaimed:
“You must not come with us.”
This was consolatory and reassuring, so I replied—
“Heaven forbid.”
During this colloquy, the table, the phi­los­o­pher, and the
devils, were all slowly moving upward to the open trap-door
of the stage above. Seeing a beam some feet higher at a
moderate distance, I inquired whether it was fixed and would
bear my weight? “Yes,” said Devil No. 1.
“But you cannot reach it at a jump,” added Devil No. 2.
“Trust that to me,” said I, “to get out of your clutches.”
We had now reached the level of the desired beam, though
not near enough for a jump. However, still ascending, we
passed it: then stooping my head and bending my body to
avoid the floor of the stage, which we were fast approaching,
I sprang down on the beam of refuge. My two missionary
companions continued their course to the world above in
order to convey the wicked Juan to the realms below. My
transit through the dark, subterranean abyss to my own
world above was rapid. I soon rejoined my companions, who
congratulated me on what they represented as my ‘undeserved
escape:’ kindly hoping that I might be equally fortunate
upon some future occasion.
Presence of mind frequently arises from having previously
considered a variety of possible events. I had never contemplated
such a situation, and have often asked myself and
others what should have been my conduct, in case I had not
escaped from my satanic companions; but no sat­is­fac­tory
conclusion has yet presented itself.
〈STALL AT THE OPERA.〉
During one season, I had a stall at
the German Opera. {254}
One evening, in the cloister scene by moonlight, in the
convent, I observed that the white bonnet of my companion
had a pink tint: so also had the paper of our books and every
white object around us.
This contrast of colour suggested to me the direct use of
coloured lights. The progress of science in producing intense
lights by the oxy-hydrogen blowpipe, and by electricity under
its various forms, enabled me to carry out the idea of producing
coloured lights for theatrical rep­re­sen­ta­tions. I made
many experiments by filling cells formed by pieces of parallel
plate glass with solutions of various salts of chrome of
copper, and of other substances.
The effects were superb. I then devised a dance, in which
they might be splendidly exhibited. This was called the
rainbow dance. I proposed to abolish the foot-lights, and
instead of them to substitute four urns with flowers. These
urns would each conceal from the audience an intense light of
one of the following colours: blue, yellow, red, or any others
which might be preferable.
The rays of light would be projected from the vases towards
the stage, and would form four cones of red, blue, yellow, and
purple light passing to its further end.
Four groups, each of fifteen danseuses in pure white, would
now enter on the stage. Each group would assume the colour
of the light in which it was placed. Thus four dances each of
a different colour would commence. Oc­ca­sion­al­ly, a damsel
from a group of one colour would spring into another group,
thus resembling a shooting star.
After a time, the coloured lights would expand laterally
and overlap each other, thus producing all the colours of the
rainbow. In the mean time the sixty damsels in pure white
forming one vast ellipse, would dance round,
each in turn {255}
assuming, as it passed through them, all the prismatic
colours.
I had mentioned these experiments and ideas to a few of my
friends, one of whom spoke of it to Mr. Lumley, the lessee of
the Italian Opera House. He thought it promised well, and
ultimately I made a series of experiments in the great concert-room.
Ropes were stretched across the room, on which were hung
in innumerable forms large sheets of patent net. The various
folds and bendings displayed the lights under endless modifications.
Some brilliant greens, some fiery reds, blues of the
brightest hue. Another of these was an almost perfect resemblance
of the dead purple powdery coating of the finest
grapes.
〈THE PHI­LOS­O­PHER WRITES A BALLET.〉
Things being thus prepared, I had a consultation with the
eminent chef-de-ballet as to the kind of dance and the
nature of the steps to be adapted to these gorgeous colours.
Thus having invented the “Rainbow Dance” I became still
more ambitious, and even thought of writing a story to introduce
it, and to give it a moral character. Hence arose the
beautiful ballet of ‘Alethes and Iris.’
〈ALETHES AND IRIS.〉
Alethes, a priest of the Sun, surrounded by every luxury
that earth can lay at the feet of its god, feels, like all before
him, that the most glorious life is sad without a companion to
sympathize with his feelings and share in his enjoyments.
He makes, therefore, a magnificent sacrifice to the god of
this visible creation, and prays for the gratification of his
solitary desire.
Apart from all the inferior orders of his class, in the midst
of clouds of incense, the high priest himself becomes entranced.
He beholds in a vision a distant and lonely
spot of bright {256}
light. Advancing towards him, it assumes a circular form,
having a small yellow centre surrounded by a deep blue confined
within a brilliant red circle.
Retaining its shape, but slowly enlarging in size, it becomes
a circular rainbow, out of which emerges a form of beauty
more resplendent than mortal eyes might bear. Approaching
the Book of Fate, which lies closed upon a golden pedestal in
this the deepest and most sacred portion of the Temple of the
Sun, she opens it and inscribes in purple symbols these
mystic signs.

·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·
·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·
·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·
·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·

Then waving her graceful arm over the entranced high
priest, she re-enters the aërial circle: it closes and retires.
Alethes, recovering from the magic spells his powerful art
had wrought, rushes to the Book of Fate, opens, and reads the
revelation it unfolds.

Through ocean’s depths to southern ice-fields roam,
Through solid strata seek earth’s central fire,
Cull from each wondrous field, each distant home,
An offering meet for her thy soul’s desire.

This gives rise to a series of moving and most instructive
dioramas, in which the travels of Alethes are depicted.

1. A rep­re­sen­ta­tion of all the inhabitants of the ocean,
comprising big fishes, lobsters, and various crustacea,
mollusca, coralines, &c.
2. A view of the antarctic regions,—a continent of ice
with an active volcano and a river of boiling water,
supplied by geysers cutting their way through cliffs of
blue ice.
3. A diorama representing the
animals whose various {257}
remains are contained in each successive layer of the
earth’s crust. In the lower portions symptoms of
increasing heat show themselves until the centre is
reached, which contains a liquid trans­par­ent sea,
con­sis­ting of some fluid at a white heat, which, how­ever,
is filled up with little infin­i­tes­i­mal eels, all of
one sort, wriggling eternally.
〈HIGH MORAL VIEW.〉
This would have produced a magnificent spectacle considered
merely as a show, but the moralist might, if he
pleased, have discovered in it a profound philosophy.
The ennui and lassitude felt by the priest of the Sun arose
from the want of occupation for his powerful mind. The
remedy proposed in the ballet was—look into all the works
of creation.
The central ocean of frying eels was added to assist the
teaching of those ministers who prefer the doctrine of the
eternity of bodily torments.38

38
An ancestor of mine, Dr. Burthogge, a great friend of
John Locke, wrote, I regret to say it, a book to prove the eternity of
torments; so I felt it a kind of hereditary duty to give him a lift.
The arguments, such as they are, of my wealthy and therefore revered
ancestor are contained in a work whose title is “Causa Dei; or, an
Apology for God,” wherein the perpetuity of infernal torments is
evinced, and Divine justice (that not­with­stand­ing) defended. By Richard
Burthogge, M.D. London: Imprinted at the Three Daggers, Fleet Street,
1675.
The learned Tobias Swinden, M.A., late rector of Cuxton, in his
“Enquiry into the Nature and Place of Hell,” 2nd edition, 1727, has
discovered that its locality is in the Sun. The accurate map he gives
of that luminary renders it highly probable that the red flames so
well observed and photographed by Mr. De La Rue during a recent total
eclipse have a real existence.
The night proposed for the experiment of the dance at
length arrived. Two fire-engines duly prepared were placed
on the stage under the care of a portion of the fire brigade.
About a dozen danseuses in their white dresses danced
and attitudinized in the rays of powerful oxy-hydrogen
{258}
blowpipes. The various brilliant hues of coloured light had an
admirable effect on the lovely fire-flies, especially as they
flitted across from one region of coloured light to another.
〈COMBUSTION THE ENEMY OF GENIUS.〉
</div></body></text></TEI>